

──────── page 1/12 ────────

The Ultimate Configuration Management Tool?
Lessons from a Mixed Methods Study of Ansible’s Challenges
Carolina Carreira∗
carolina.carreira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Carnegie Mellon University, INESC-ID, and IST, University
of Lisbon
Lisbon, Portugal
Nuno Saavedra∗
nuno.saavedra@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
INESC-ID and IST, University of Lisbon
Lisbon, Portugal
Alexandra Mendes
alexandra@archimendes.com
INESC TEC, Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Porto, Portugal
João F. Ferreira
joao@joaoff.com
INESC-ID and Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Porto, Portugal
Abstract
Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tools have transformed the way IT
infrastructure is automated and managed, but their growing adop-
tion has also exposed numerous challenges for practitioners. In this
paper, we investigate these challenges through the lens of Ansible,
a popular IaC tool. Using a mixed methods approach, we investigate
challenges, obstacles, and issues faced by practitioners. We analyze
59,157 posts from Stack Overflow, Reddit, and the Ansible Forum to
identify common pain points, complemented by 20 semi-structured
interviews with practitioners of varying expertise levels.
Based on our findings, we propose four main recommendations
to improve Ansible: 1) refactoring to mitigate performance issues,
2) restructuring higher-level language concepts, 3) improved de-
bugging and error reporting tools, and 4) better documentation
and learning resources. By highlighting the real-world struggles
of Ansible users, we provide actionable insights for tool designers,
educators, and the broader IaC community, contributing to a deeper
understanding of the trade-offs inherent in IaC tools.
1
Introduction
Infrastructure as Code (IaC) has emerged as a critical paradigm in
modern software engineering, enabling organizations to automate
the configuration, provisioning, and management of IT infrastruc-
ture. By treating infrastructure configurations as code, IaC enables
practitioners to use software engineering practices such as auto-
mated testing and version control, and facilitates reproducibility,
scalability, and maintainability of infrastructure resources.
IaC has become widespread across industries, with several tools
gaining significant adoption. Examples of widely used IaC tools
include Ansible [49], Chef [40], and Puppet [38] for configuration
management, and Terraform [18] and CloudFormation [3] for infras-
tructure provisioning. These tools allow organizations to automate
complex infrastructure tasks, reducing manual effort and the risk
of human error. For example, NASA and Siemens use Ansible to
automate infrastructure deployment and configuration manage-
ment [33, 53]. The widespread adoption of these tools highlights
their importance in modern software operations.
Despite the significant advantages of IaC, practitioners face sev-
eral challenges. Since IaC involves writing code, errors can be
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
introduced, leading to misconfigurations that affect system secu-
rity [37, 44, 46, 56, 59, 61] and system reliability [14, 15, 21, 24,
67, 73]. For example, due to bugs in their IaC scripts, GitHub ex-
perienced an outage of its DNS infrastructure [13] and Amazon
Web Services lost around 150 million dollars after issues with its
S3 billing system [20]. To address this, there has been an effort
by the research community to categorize, identify and repair de-
fects [8, 9, 19, 30, 36, 37, 43, 44, 46–48, 56, 59–64, 75]. In addition,
IaC tools themselves present challenges, such as unintuitive debug-
ging mechanisms, inconsistent behaviors, and complex learning
curves. Prior research has explored challenges faced by IaC prac-
titioners, identifying common issues and limitations of existing
tools [7, 16, 45, 70]. However, existing studies often take a broad
perspective, examining challenges across multiple DevOps or IaC
tools, which can dilute insights specific to any one tool. Studies
focused on a single IaC tool have not, so far, included Ansible.
In this paper, we aim to deepen the understanding of the chal-
lenges faced by Ansible users. Ansible is currently the most widely
used configuration management tool [68] and, although Ansible
is known to have issues, such as difficulties with variable scop-
ing [35] and debugging [17], the specifics of these challenges and
their impact on practitioners remain underexplored. Using a mixed
methods approach, we analyze a large corpus of online discussions
and conduct semi-structured interviews to systematically exam-
ine the obstacles faced by Ansible users. Our study is the first to
provide a detailed account of these issues and to offer actionable
recommendations for improvement.
In summary, our contributions are:
• A large-scale empirical analysis of 59,157 online discussions
from Stack Overflow, Reddit, and the Ansible Forum to identify
common challenges and issues in Ansible.
• Insights from 20 semi-structured interviews with Ansible prac-
titioners of varying expertise levels, providing qualitative per-
spectives on usability and technical challenges.
• Recommendations for improving Ansible, focusing on documen-
tation, debugging tools, and architectural enhancements.
• Broader implications for IaC tool the design and evolution, high-
lighting trade-offs between usability, flexibility, and scalability.
Our study aims to inform Ansible’s developers, educators, and the
broader IaC community, fostering improvements that enhance the
arXiv:2504.08678v2  [cs.SE]  6 Oct 2025


──────── page 2/12 ────────

Carreira et al.
effectiveness and usability of IaC tools. A replication package with
all the data and code used in this study is available at:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15031088
2
Ansible
According to the Stack Overflow Developers Survey 2024, Ansible
is the most widely used configuration management tool [68].
To define the desired system state, practitioners must write
declarative code using Ansible’s hierarchical structure, which con-
sists of four levels: roles, playbooks, plays, and tasks. Roles serve
as reusable components that organize related functionality, includ-
ing tasks, variables, modules, and templates. Playbooks, written in
YAML, define configurations by grouping multiple plays. Each play
associates specific hosts, identified by tags or hostnames, with a
set of tasks. Tasks are the fundamental execution units in Ansible,
consisting of an optional name and an action, which are performed
using an Ansible module with specified arguments. Modules are
reusable, standalone Python scripts that interact with the target
host to execute specific tasks. For example, the ansible.builtin.shell
module runs shell commands on the host. Ansible also supports
blocks that group multiple tasks together.
Execution order. By default, Ansible executes tasks sequentially
in the order in which they appear in the playbook. However, certain
tasks can be configured to execute only when triggered by other
tasks. These tasks, known as handlers, run in response to changes
detected in preceding tasks.
Variables and Templates. Ansible uses variables to manage system
differences, allowing the same variable name to hold different values
for each host. These variables can be used in playbooks to adjust
task behavior based on the target host. They can be defined in
various ways, such as within playbooks or in Ansible’s inventory.
Additionally, Ansible automatically gathers special variables called
facts, which provide system information such as operating system
details. Variable precedence is determined by the location where the
variable is defined and follows a hierarchy of 22 rules [4]. Ansible
leverages Jinja2 templating to enable dynamic expressions and
access to variables and facts [4], both within the playbooks and in
configuration files used via the template module.
Push-based model. Unlike configuration management tools such
as Chef and Puppet, Ansible follows a push-based configuration
model. Typically, configuration management tools use a pull-based
model that involves a server that stores configurations and target
hosts that retrieve them. However, in a push model, the server ac-
tively sends configurations to the target hosts rather than waiting
for them to request updates. Since target hosts do not initiate com-
munication, push-based systems such as Ansible do not require an
agent on each machine. Instead, a server, commanded by the Ansi-
ble user and with SSH access to all hosts, deploys Ansible modules
to bring each host to the desired state.
Example. Figure 1 presents excerpts of an Ansible playbook for
configuring a web server. This playbook consists of a single play.
Here, we show three tasks and one handler. In line 3, the playbook
specifies that it applies to all target hosts listed in the inventory.
Line 5 defines the use of the webserver role, ensuring that all tasks
within this role are executed. Line 9 demonstrates the use of an
Ansible fact to display the operating system of the target host,
1
---
2
- name: Set up and configure web server
3
hosts: all
4
gather_facts: yes
5
roles: ['webserver'] # Role to set up a web server
6
tasks:
7
- name: Display system facts
8
debug:
9
msg: "The system OS is {{ ansible_facts['os_family'] }}."
10
when: ansible_facts['os_family'] == 'Debian'
11
12
- name: Ensure Nginx is installed
13
apt:
14
name: nginx
15
notify: Restart Nginx
16
17
- name: Deploy an index.html template
18
template:
19
src: templates/index.html.j2
20
dest: /var/www/html/index.html
21
notify: Reload Nginx
22
23
(...)
24
handlers:
25
- name: Restart Nginx
26
service:
27
name: nginx
28
state: restarted
29
(...)
Figure 1: Excerpts from an Ansible playbook to configure a
web server.
using Jinja2 syntax for variable access, if the condition specified
in line 10 is met. In line 15, the playbook specifies that if the state
of the nginx package changes, the handler Restart Nginx (line 25)
should be triggered. Line 18 employs a Jinja template to dynamically
generate a default web page, allowing the use of Ansible variables
for customization.
3
Mixed Methods Study
In this section, we outline our research questions and describe
the methodology used to answer them. Our study follows a mixed
methods approach (see Figure 2). First, we collected posts from Q&A
platforms and used topic modeling to understand the challenges
faced by Ansible practitioners. We then conducted semi-structured
interviews to gain deeper insights into the participants’ experiences.
3.1
Research Questions
We aim to answer the following research questions.
RQ1: [Issues] What are the common issues practitioners face
when using Ansible? In this question, we investigate the common
challenges that practitioners face while working with Ansible. By
analyzing the emergent topics from practioners’ posts in Q&A
platforms and practitioners feedback from interviews, we aim to
categorize these challenges and identify patterns that can help us
to understand pain points across various praticioner groups.
RQ2: [Adoption] What are the aspects that influence the adop-
tion of Ansible? This question focuses on the factors that drive
Ansible’s adoption, identified via interviews with practitioners.
RQ3: [Improvements] What changes would improve Ansible?
This question aims to identify actionable suggestions for improv-
ing Ansible. The goal is to provide insights for Ansible’s develop-
ment community, and broader IaC community, on how to refine
the tool to better meet practitioners’ expectations and needs.


──────── page 3/12 ────────

The Ultimate Configuration Management Tool?
Lessons from a Mixed Methods Study of Ansible’s Challenges
20 Interviews
TopicGPT
Initial Topic List
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
7
300 pairs
(Post, Topic)
Manual
Validation
8
Manual Refinement
Final Topic List
6
"Slow Ansible
installation of cron jobs"
"Ansible WinRM
Kerberos Authentication"
"Hostvars - undefined
variable within contained play"
Recruitment
Survey
Manual
Assignment
12
Text-Based
Script
Cleaning
Initial Codebook
Developlement
Eligibility
Verification
Demographic
Information
"Slow Ansible
installation of cron jobs"
"Ansible WinRM
Kerberos Authentication"
"Hostvars - undefined
variable within contained play"
PERFORMANCE
VARIABLES
AUTHENTICATION
CODEBOOKS
8
Voice
Challenges
Background
Advantages
Recommendations
Future
Thematic
Analysis
1
2
3
4
5
6
Manual
Matching
Precision
Figure 2: Overview of the research methodology combining automated topic extraction and thematic analysis.
3.2
Topic Modeling
Building on previous studies [7, 70], we apply topic modeling tech-
niques to identify the challenges practitioners face when using a
specific tool, in our case, Ansible. In particular, we use TopicGPT, a
prompt-based framework that uses large language models (LLMs)
to uncover latent topics in a text collection [39]. TopicGPT provides
interpretable topics that align better with human categorizations
than other approaches such as LDA and BERTopic [39]. After data
is collected, the TopicGPT framework involves three steps: Topic
Generation, Topic Refinement, and Topic Assignment. In our study,
we also perform manual validation of the Topic Assignment step.
We configured TopicGPT to use GPT-4o mini via the OpenAI API,
specifically the gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 version.
3.2.1
Data Collection We start by collecting posts about challenges,
obstacles, and issues faced by Ansible practitioners from three
Q&A platforms: StackOverflow [66], Reddit [54], and the Ansible
Forum [51] ( 1 in Figure 2). To collect posts from StackOverflow,
we used the Stack Exchange API [65] and retrieved all posts with
the tag Ansible, which corresponds to a total of 23,000 posts. For
Reddit, we used the PullPush API [41] to collect all 7,187 posts
on the subreddit r/ansible that contained the keyword Ansible in
addition to keywords possibly related to issues, such as error, help,
or slow. For the Ansible Forum, we used web scraping techniques
to collect 28,970 posts in the Get Help and Archives categories. We
included the category Archives in our analysis, as it contains all
posts from the Ansible Google Group, the predecessor of the Ansible
Forum, which were later migrated to the Ansible Forum [52]. We
filtered out posts related to announcements and releases by the
Ansible team. In total, we collected 59,157 posts from the three
Q&A platforms, forming our final dataset. Data collection took
place between January 24, 2025, and February 1, 2025.
3.2.2
Topic Generation We use TopicGPT to generate a set of top-
ics given our whole dataset as input ( 2 in Figure 2). A topic consists
of a name and a description. For each post, TopicGPT prompts GPT-
4o Mini to assign one or more of the already generated topics and
generate any new relevant topics that are missing, assigning them
accordingly. To increase the probability that the topics generated
are relevant to our study, we added to the default prompt of Top-
icGPT the phrase: “The topics must be related to challenges, issues,
or problems that developers face while using Ansible.”. In the end,
TopicGPT generated 3,573 topics ( 3 in Figure 2).
3.2.3
Topic Refinement TopicGPT produces numerous topics that,
while generally relevant, are often overly granular, duplicated, or
out of scope [39]. To mitigate these limitations, it incorporates an
automated topic refinement step. However, in our first experiments,
we achieved unsatisfactory results, even when using more powerful
LLMs such as o3-mini-2025-01-31. For example, in one of our test
runs, this approach was unable to merge the following pair of topics
with a cosine similarity of 0.9600, which TopicGPT uses to measure
semantic proximity:
1
Regex
I s s u e s
Desc :
Problems
r e l a t e d
to
the
use
of
r e g u l a r
e x p r e s s i o n s
in
Ansible
t a s k s .
2
Regex Desc :
I s s u e s
r e l a t e d
to
the
use
of
r e g u l a r
e x p r e s s i o n s
in
Ansible .
For this reason, we adopted an approach similar to TopicGPT, but
instead of using LLMs, we relied on manual effort to ensure a more
reliable final topic list ( 4 in Figure 2). First, instead of merging the
topics first and then removing the infrequent ones, we reversed the
order. This approach reduced the number of topic pairs that needed
to be analyzed during the merging process. The topic distribution
follows a power law, where a small number of topics account for
the majority of post attributions, whereas most topics are assigned
to only a few posts. To ensure adequate coverage, we initialized an
empty set and incrementally added topics in descending order of
attribution frequency until reaching 80% of the total attributions.
Topics that were not included in the final set were discarded. After
this step, our topic list was reduced from 3,573 to 153 topics.
Next, we applied an iterative manual refinement process similar
to the merging step used in TopicGPT. In each iteration, we sys-
tematically evaluated topic pairs, starting with those exhibiting the
highest cosine similarity and proceeding to those with the lowest
similarity down to a predefined threshold for that iteration. Simi-
larly to TopicGPT, we used Sentence-Transformer embeddings [55]
to calculate cosine similarity. Then, for each pair, one author de-
termined whether the topics should be merged and, if so, whether
they should be combined into one of the existing topics or assigned


──────── page 4/12 ────────

Carreira et al.
to a newly created topic. The criterion for merging topics was the
presence of significant semantic overlap between them. If a topic
was merged in a given iteration, pairs that included the merged
topic were excluded from further evaluation within that iteration.
A second author independently reviewed the merged topics, docu-
menting any disagreements or ambiguous cases requiring further
discussion. After this independent review, both authors met to
resolve discrepancies and reach a consensus. The process was re-
peated six times until no further merges were identified, resulting
in a candidate topic list. In the first three iterations, we applied a
cosine similarity threshold of 0.7, while in the last three iterations,
we lowered the threshold to 0.6. After the merging process, we
reduced our topic list from 153 to 105 topics.
Finally, following the approaches used in previous studies [5, 23],
we manually inspected the topics to identify those relevant to our
study. A topic was considered relevant if it is related to the chal-
lenges, frustrations, issues, or drawbacks associated with using
Ansible. We considered only topics that were specific enough to
provide meaningful information about a post. For example, this
led us to remove the topic Task Execution with description “Issues
related to the execution of tasks in Ansible, including conditions and
dependencies for task execution.”. In addition, we refined topic names
and descriptions. A topic name was considered improved if it more
effectively represented its description, while a description was con-
sidered improved if it maintained its core ideas while increasing
generality, eliminating unnecessary details, or using a clearer and
more concise language. Finally, if we identified any additional pairs
of topics that met our merging criteria but were not initially de-
tected during the merging process, we merged them accordingly.
An author reviewed each topic, determining whether it should
be removed, renamed, or modified. Subsequently, a second author
independently reviewed the proposed changes, documenting any
disagreements or ambiguous cases requiring further discussion.
After this independent review, both authors met to resolve discrep-
ancies and reach a consensus. This resulted in a final list of 87 topics
( 5 in Figure 2, see Supplemental Materials for the full topic list).
3.2.4
Topic Assignment We use the topic list generated in Sec-
tion 3.2.3 and TopicGPT to assign topics to each post. We also apply
the self-correction step provided in the TopicGPT framework [39]
( 6 in Figure 2).
3.2.5
Validation To assess the quality of the topic assignment de-
scribed in Section 3.2.4, we employ the confirmation labeling ap-
proach [74]. To calculate the precision of topic assignment, this
method involves sampling (post, topic) pairs of assignments under
evaluation. Rather than presenting raters with the entire taxonomy
and asking them to manually assign topics to posts, confirmation
labeling simplifies the process by requiring raters to provide binary
judgments on whether a given topic is relevant to a particular post.
This approach effectively reduces the cognitive overload of a large
and complex taxonomy [74].
Two authors independently performed confirmation labeling on
a sample of 300 (post, topic) pairs ( 7 in Figure 2). The inter-rater
agreement, measured using Cohen’s Kappa [11], was approximately
0.29, which according to Landis and Koch’s interpretation [27], is
classified as a fair agreement. A third author performed confirma-
tion labeling on the (post, topic) pairs where the initial two authors’
judgments diverged. The final judgment was decided by majority
vote. Ultimately, TopicGPT’s topic assignment achieved a precision
( 8 in Figure 2) of approximately 82.67%.
3.2.6
Analysis To draw relevant insights across our topic analysis
and the interviews, we merged the final list of topics derived from
TopicGPT with the thematic codes identified in the interview data
(Section 3.3). Specifically, we integrated the topics with a set of
Challenges codes by aligning each topic with the most closely re-
lated theme. This process was iterative and followed a double-blind
procedure: first, two coders independently grouped the topics into
themes. Then, both coders met to discuss disagreements and reach a
consensus. In analyzing the merged data, we examined the relative
frequency of each topic across the resulting themes and investi-
gated how these frequencies evolved. We restricted our scope to
the last five years of Q&A data to better capture current and emerg-
ing concerns, totaling 23,215 posts. In addition to recent posts, we
leveraged the data older than five years to identify evolution trends.
3.3
Interviews
In addition to the large-scale analysis of Q&A posts, we conducted
semi-structured interviews to gain a deeper understanding of prac-
titioners’ day-to-day experiences with Ansible. In the following
section, we describe the recruitment process, the structure of the
interviews, and the analysis. All interview materials are in the
Supplemental Materials.
3.3.1
Participants We categorize participants based on their level
of expertise with Ansible. For this we use years of experience
due to support in previous work [28, 58] and also to mitigate the
Dunning-Kruger Effect, where users overestimate their skills in self-
assessments [31]. We define three levels of expertise with Ansible:
Beginner (less than two years of experience, n = 5); Intermediate
(two to five years of experience, inclusive, n = 7); and Experienced
(more than five years of experience, n = 8).
Recruitment We recruited 20 participants through a pre-screening
survey distributed via email and various social media platforms,
including LinkedIn, X (formerly Twitter), Discord, and Slack ( 1
in Figure 2). To meet our eligibility criteria, participants had to have
prior experience using Ansible. Following this stage, participants
selected their preferred interview modality: a text-based or video-
based session conducted via Zoom. The availability of both formats
was intended to address known challenges in recruiting software
developers for research studies [6], a challenge we also encoun-
tered in our study. A total of 118 out of 127 survey participants
were eligible and, among these, 20 were available for an interview
(an interview rate of 15.7%). Most of the participants (12 out of 20)
opted for a text interview. Several participants mentioned that they
would only be able to participate in the interview if they could do
it through text. As an incentive, the interviewed participants could
enter a raffle for a $100 gift card.
The supplementary material contains full details on the demo-
graphics of the participants. In summary, participants reported
anywhere from 1 to more than 9 years of Ansible experience, with
many currently using Ansible (15). Most identified as male (17),
ranged in age from 18–34 (11), and held at least a bachelor’s degree
(17). Almost all had a job in CS and had a formal CS education (17).


──────── page 5/12 ────────

The Ultimate Configuration Management Tool?
Lessons from a Mixed Methods Study of Ansible’s Challenges
Ethical Considerations Before participating in the survey or the
interview, all individuals reviewed the consent form and provided
informed consent. This study was reviewed and approved by the
ethics board at the first authors’ institution.
3.3.2
Interviews We conducted semi-structured interviews to ob-
tain a nuanced understanding of the participants’ experiences with
Ansible ( 2 in Figure 2). Semi-structured interviews are the most
widely used interviewing method [12] and allow adaptability to
explore emerging themes and seek clarifications [29]. We piloted
the protocol with four participants. Both text and voice-based inter-
views required around 30 minutes of attention time. The latter were
recorded and automatically transcribed with participant consent
using Zoom’s built-in transcription functionality. Research team
members manually reviewed and corrected the resulting transcripts.
Each interview followed a structured protocol that encompassed
five key thematic areas: contextual background, perceived ad-
vantages, challenges, recommendations, and future of Ansible.
The interview started with general background questions. We then
moved the discussion towards the advantages of Ansible and adop-
tion challenges. Then, we focused the discussion on Ansible’s limi-
tations. The interview concluded with exploring recommendations
to improve Ansible and future perspectives. We actively sought
clarification whenever responses were ambiguous or required elab-
oration, both in textual and voice-based interviews.
3.3.3
Analysis We developed five emergent codebooks using the-
matic analysis [10, 29], following a bottom-up approach that al-
lowed themes and codes to emerge inductively from our data. We
started by reading the transcripts to highlight recurring ideas, creat-
ing initial codes, and iteratively refining them into coherent themes
( 3 and 4 in Figure 2). Our codebooks are related to the five key
thematic areas as follows: (1) Background: Exploring why partic-
ipants use Ansible and the specific contexts in which they apply
it; (2) Advantages: Identifying the key motivations behind adop-
tion; (3) Challenges: Documenting difficulties and limitations; (4)
Recommendations: Capturing participants’ wishes; (5) Future:
Addressing potential future developments.
For each of these five areas, we developed a codebook. We fol-
lowed a methodology similar to the one present in prior work [22,
26, 69], and that is recommended by Human-Centered research
guidelines [29]. One of the authors developed an initial codebook
that captured key aspects of the responses. The initial codebook
was shared with a second coder (also an author) , who reviewed and
suggested modifications based on a subset of interview data. We
repeated this process multiple times until consensus was reached
and the codebook was deemed stable. Once we established the
final version of the codebook, we double-coded all of the inter-
views, where one coder systematically applied the codes to all
interview responses, and the second coder independently reviewed
the applied codes. This review involved cross-checking all coded
transcripts to identify inconsistencies or overlooked themes. The
second coder made detailed notes on any disagreements. When
there was a change to the codebook, for example, a new code, the
coding process was restarted. Finally, both coders met to discuss
discrepancies and reach a consensus ( 5 and 6 in Figure 2). When
attributing quotes, we report the participant ID and the experience
of the participant: (B)eginner, (I)ntermediate or (E)xperienced. For
example, B1 refers to a beginner participant.
4
RQ1: Common Issues in Ansible Usage
This section presents the seven primary challenge categories en-
countered by Ansible practitioners, obtained from the topic model-
ing analysis and interview data, in descending order of prevalence.
4.1
Control/Data Flow and Execution
According to our topic modeling analysis, Control/Data Flow and Ex-
ecution is the most significant theme that represents the challenges
Ansible practitioners face. Our approach identified 8,793 posts re-
lated to Control Flow and Execution, which represents around 37.9%
of all recent posts.
4.1.1
Topic Analysis Within the Control/Data Flow and Execution
theme, Loops represent the most significant challenge for Ansible
practitioners (16.4%). As one practitioner stated , “I don’t understand
why loops are so hard to do in this language.”. Loops are followed by
SSH Connection Issues to hosts (14.9%), Variable Management (14.4%),
Conditional Execution (12.4%), and Undefined Variables (12.3%).
Topic Evolution The number of references to Loops in posts in-
creased from 2.9% of all posts in 2013 to 7.4% in 2022, before decreas-
ing to 4.3% in 2024 (
). Contrarily, the number of posts related to
Variable Management decreased from 8.9% in 2013 to 5.4% in 2024
(
). This evolution suggests that, while loop issues persist and
even increase, Ansible may be making progress in addressing the
challenges related to management of variables.
4.1.2
Interviews Participants described various control flow issues.
For instance, B1 mentioned frustration with sequential execution
slowing runs and a lack of synchronization primitives (n = 2). In more
advanced setups, complexities grew around managing dependencies
(n = 3). Beyond these granular concerns, a handful of participants
reflected on code structure/organization difficulties (n = 5). In con-
trast, others cited Ansible’s inherently stateless (n = 5) nature as a
double-edged sword — simpler to run but lacking built-in features
for preserving or comparing states. The push model/agentless (n =
5) approach was both praised and criticized: praised for minimal
overhead yet lamented for complicating continuous enforcement.
4.2
Reliability
Reliability emerged as the second most discussed theme, accounting
for approximately 32.3% of all recent posts.
4.2.1
Topic Analysis Although Error Handling is the most repre-
sented topic within the Reliability theme (16.4%), TopicGPT’s in-
terpretation of this topic is quite generic. As a result, despite its
description being related to the handling of errors in Ansible play-
books, the topic was frequently used in cases where arbitrary errors
occurred. Following Error Handling, the most discussed issues are
related to file management (11.5%), permissions (8.1%), JMESPath
(5.9%) and the use of shell commands (5.4%).
Topic Evolution In 2013, Permission Issues represented just 1.4%
of the total posts in that year, but by 2024, this figure had increased
to 3.2% (
). This increase may suggest that Ansible practitioners


──────── page 6/12 ────────

Carreira et al.
0
2K
5K
8K
10K
Total
Other
Loops
SSH Connection Issues
Variable Management
Conditional Execution
Undefined Variables
8,793
3,039 (34.6%)
1,444 (16.4%)
1,306 (14.9%)
1,268 (14.4%)
1,092 (12.4%)
1,078 (12.3%)
Control/Data Flow and Execution
0
2K
5K
8K
10K
Total
Other
Error Handling
File Management
Permission Issues
JMESPath
Shell Command Usage
7,507
4,138 (55.1%)
1,233 (16.4%)
864 (11.5%)
608 (8.1%)
446 (5.9%)
408 (5.4%)
Reliability
0
2K
5K
8K
10K
Total
Other
AWX
Module Execution Failures
Integration Issues
Module Usage
Windows Management
7,443
3,138 (42.2%)
1,557 (20.9%)
942 (12.7%)
760 (10.2%)
730 (9.8%)
681 (9.1%)
Lack of Support
0
2K
5K
8K
10K
Total
Other
Jinja2
Quoting Issues
Playbook Input
YAML Syntax
Regex
3,846
511 (13.3%)
1,272 (33.1%)
862 (22.4%)
786 (20.4%)
416 (10.8%)
317 (8.2%)
Usability
0
2K
5K
8K
10K
Total
Other
Dynamic Inventory
Inventory Management
Performance
Remote Execution
Delegation
1,738
189 (10.9%)
539 (31.0%)
518 (29.8%)
308 (17.7%)
148 (8.5%)
134 (7.7%)
Performance and Scalability
0
2K
5K
8K
10K
Total
Other
Deprecation
Dependency Management
Compatibility Issues
Ansible Versions
Version Control
683
11 (1.6%)
235 (34.4%)
159 (23.3%)
134 (19.6%)
97 (14.2%)
84 (12.3%)
Maintenance
0
2K
5K
8K
10K
Total
Documentation
Community Engagement
465
464 (99.8%)
1 (0.2%)
Information Gaps
Number of Unique Posts
Figure 3: Distribution of posts across topics and their respective themes.
are encountering more permission-related issues, likely due to in-
teractions with hosts that have more strict security configurations.
4.2.2
Interviews Reliability issues emerged in discussions around
debugging. Multiple participants reported that Ansible is hard to
debug (n = 10). I7 tries to avoid Ansible to debug complex cases: “if
there’s some more complex stages in my playbooks what I try to do
is to transfer those to a shell script that I can pass outside of Ansible
and I can test those separately.”. B2 described moments when “it
would get stuck for 15 minutes in a supposedly 1 min script before
I forced it to close without any visible changes on the terminal.”.
Some lamented the lack of infrastructure debugging tools (n = 5)
built into Ansible, while others pointed to bad error messages when
modules returned cryptic outputs. As B4 put it, “I actually believe
that there’s not a proper way to debugging this [Infrastructure as
Code] type of scripts and tools.”.
4.3
Lack of Support
Lack of Support is the second most significant theme, accounting
for 32.1% of the recent posts with a total of 7,443 posts.
4.3.1
Topic Analysis Within this theme, AWX-related issues domi-
nated discussions (20.9%), followed by module execution failures
(12.7%), integration issues (10.8%), module usage problems (9.8%),
and Windows-related challenges (9.1%). These findings suggest
that practitioners encounter persistent challenges with the use of
AWX, an open-source project serving as the upstream for Ansible’s
enterprise version, along with issues related to module reliability,
understanding how to use modules, integrating Ansible playbooks
with external systems, and managing Windows hosts.
Topic Evolution The number of posts related to AWX, launched
in 2017, has increased significantly from 1.6% of the overall posts
in its release year to 9.8% in 2024 (
). Another topic that saw
significant growth was Integration Issues, increasing from 0.8% in
2013 to 5.1% in 2024 (
). This suggests that as Ansible matured,
practitioners increasingly sought solutions for integrating with
external services. In the opposite direction, posts related to Module
Development decreased from 1.6% in 2013 to 0.6% in 2024 (
).
4.3.2
Interviews The theme lack of support touched on problems
such as missing features that require modules (n = 3), limited OS
support (n = 4), and Python version constraints (n = 1). Other
participants criticized the lack of support for certain modules (n = 7).
As E4 put it “There’s a lack of support for some modules (...). You
often have to write your own or hope someone did it.”.
4.4
Usability
Usability represents approximately 16.6% of recent posts, totaling
3,846 posts.
4.4.1
Topic Analysis The issues related to Jinja2 are by far the most
represented, with around 33.1% of the posts within the Usability
theme. For instance, in one of the posts, an Ansible practitioner
mentioned: “Unfortunately, Jinja2 has been incredibly challenging
to work with.”. Issues related to quoting (22.4%), playbook inputs
(20.4%), YAML syntax (10.8%), and regex (8.2%) are also prominently
discussed. When talking about their issues with YAML, a practioner
mentioned: “I find YAML or Ansible’s interpretation of Yaml very
frustrating and confusing.”.
Topic Evolution In 2013, issues related to Jinja2 were not as promi-
nent, only 2.4% of the posts that year. However, Jinja2-related issues
peaked at 6.9% in 2021, before decreasing to 3.8% by 2024 (
).
4.4.2
Interviews Ansible’s usability emerged as a significant issue
for many participants. It includes user onboarding issues and com-
plaints about complex syntax. Participants expressed that it can be
challenging for beginners (n = 12) to grasp the tool’s declarative na-
ture, in particular for those that lacked a coding background (n = 2).
Others felt they had to make a mental shift (n = 4), especially if they
were used to more imperative scripting. As E8 said, “If you’ve never
seen Terraform, CloudFormation (...) it’ll look weird and alienating.”.
Moreover, sometimes it can be hard to pick the right approach (n =
4). Participants also complained about complex syntax in general (n
= 4). Ansible’s reliance on YAML and Jinja introduced the problems
of YAML and Jinja complexity (n = 5 and 6). As E5 said, “I once
spent 8 hours of work figuring out the escaping on a line of SQL
because YAML is so bad at figuring out quotes (...) The hell that is
escaping in YAML will never die.”.
4.5
Performance and Scalability
Performance and Scalability represents approximately 7.5% of recent
posts, with 1,738 posts discussing these issues.
4.5.1
Topic Analysis Issues related to dynamic inventories (31.0%)
and inventory management (29.8%) are the most frequently dis-
cussed topics within Performance and Scalability, followed by per-
formance (17.7%), remote execution (8.5%) and delegation (7.7%).


──────── page 7/12 ────────

The Ultimate Configuration Management Tool?
Lessons from a Mixed Methods Study of Ansible’s Challenges
Topic Evolution Inventory management issues have remained
relatively stable between 2013 and 2024, consistently accounting
for between 1.8% and 2.5% of the total yearly posts (
).
4.5.2
Interviews Scalability limitations (7) were frequently men-
tioned by participants managing large infrastructures. B1 stated:
“When you run a playbook for like 100 hosts, it gets really confus-
ing trying to make sense of the messages.”. Participants specifically
described problems related to managing inventories (n = 1) and code
awareness (n = 4) in large projects. A related source of concern was
slow execution (n = 8). While some liked the simplicity of SSH-based
workflows, a few individuals cited agentless (n = 4) as detrimental
in high-volume scenarios. E4 was particularly direct: “It does not
scale when you start to manage 100th of servers, it becomes slow
because there is no agent.”.
4.6
Maintenance
Maintenance challenges appear in 683 posts, which corresponds to
about 3% of the total of recent posts.
4.6.1
Topic Analysis Challenges related to deprecated features and
settings in Ansible (34.4%), dependency management (23.3%), com-
patibility issues (19.6%) — which include, for example, supporting
legacy operating systems —, different Ansible versions (14.2%) or
version controlling Ansible projects (12.3%) are the most relevant
topics in the Maintenance theme.
4.6.2
Interviews Participants noted that certain aspects of Ansible
maintenance remain nontrivial. In particular, several mentioned
that removing configurations is difficult (n = 3) — as modifying
the playbook alone does not guarantee that older changes get un-
done without explicit tasks. E2 explained that “Doing things like
removing config from hosts tends not to work so well in Ansible,”.
Configuration drift (n = 5) was also mentioned. As I3 described
“Deletes are hard: one cannot merely delete parts of the Ansible
playbook and expect those changes to be undone in hosts. Instead,
we must change or even add tasks undoing the configuration we
want gone.”. Other participants mentioned that Ansible can be hard
to maintain (n = 5) and were concerned about deprecations (n = 5).
4.7
Information Gaps
The Information Gaps theme is the least prevalent, accounting for
only 465 posts, or about 2% of all recent posts. Of these 465 posts,
464 address the challenges practitioners face with documentation.
4.7.1
Interviews Another concern revolved around information
gaps, particularly documentation that is either overwhelming or in-
complete. E2 talked about misleading information: “Another issue is
incorrect or misleading answers on forums and newsgroups. Begin-
ners may struggle to distinguish good advice from bad.”. The theme
of documentation gaps (n = 9) appeared in several responses, with
participants describing the difficulty of locating relevant or clear
information among Ansible’s extensive (but sometimes inconsis-
tent) references. Although multiple participants praised Ansible’s
core documentation (described in Section 5), they also identified a
steep learning curve for interpreting specific advanced.
RQ1: We identified seven core challenge categories — Con-
trol/Data Flow and Execution, Reliability, Lack of Support, Us-
ability, Performance and Scalability, Maintenance and Informa-
tion Gaps — with Q&A emphasizing high-frequency technical
issues (e.g., loops, SSH connectivity) and interviews high-
lighting more nuanced concerns such as stale configurations,
misleading community advice, and complex setup processes.
5
RQ2: Factors Influencing Ansible Adoption
This section analyzes how interview participants first encountered
Ansible and their reasons for selecting it over other IaC solutions.
We go over Background and Advantages described in Section 3.3.3.
Initial Exposure to Ansible. Participants described how they dis-
covered Ansible. The most common way was in professional settings
(n = 6), where it was already an established tool. Social media plat-
forms also played a notable role in exposure (n = 4), particularly X.
As E5 recounted: “In 2016, [someone] posted a tweet about a new
configuration management tool (...) I had a look.” Some participants
also independently sought out Ansible (n = 3).
Accessibility & Usability. A significant theme in our codebook is
the role of Ansible’s accessibility and usability in driving adoption.
Several participants described it as Easy to use (n = 13), Easy to
onboard to new people (n = 7), and with a Low Barrier to Entry for
Setup (n = 6) highlighting how they only needed to master a limited
set of concepts—such as basic playbook structures and inventory
configuration—before managing a wide range of environments. B1
remarked, “To get things done, I only really needed to understand
a small set of concepts regarding how Ansible works (...) ”. Partici-
pants also cited Ansible’s Readable syntax (n = 6) and Good Logs (n
= 1). E6 highlighted that “[we] were looking into Ansible because
it has a nice YAML syntax”.
Tool Qualities and Ecossystem. Beyond accessibility, Ansible was
praised for its tool qualities. Participants highlighted its Efficient
use of resources, with one participant citing Lightweight resource
consumption and three mentioning Scalability. Efficiency was also
linked to Cost-Effectiveness, with B4 saying, “Ansible is like a [inex-
pensive] version [of Kubernetes] for scalability”. Another advantage
of Ansible is its Flexibility, since it can be a One-Tool Solution (n = 2)
capable of managing heterogeneous environments (e.g., Windows,
Linux, or network devices). As E3 puts it, the “One tool that does it
all”. Several participants emphasized that Ansible’s Compatibility (n
= 6) with various operational requirements and existing workflows
set it apart from other tools, and its Agentless (n = 9) model that
depends solely on SSH. Idempotence (n = 2) was also considered
important for participants, ensuring the same playbook can be ap-
plied repeatedly to converge infrastructure into a consistent state.
As I3 described: “Some commands are dangerous to invoke twice.”
From an Ecosystem standpoint, respondents highlighted features
such as Easy to extend (n = 4), Good Tooling (n = 1), and the fact
that It’s implemented in Python (n = 2).
Participants frequently framed their rationale in comparative
terms, highlighting Ansible’s advantages over alternatives like Pup-
pet, Chef, and Salt. A common comparative advantage cited was
the elimination of agent management overhead. E5 provided an il-
lustrative anecdote highlighting Ansible’s comparative operational


──────── page 8/12 ────────

Carreira et al.
model advantages: “(...) a place I was working was using Puppet,
and the admin was woken up at 3 am from a page, fixed the issue,
went to bed, and then Puppet restored the broken configuration, so
he woke up again, fixed the Puppet, and then went to bed. Then,
was woken up again because Puppet updated itself from git.”.
Community. A third central theme centers on Ansible’s Com-
munity. The tool’s Popularity (n = 4) and Community (n = 4) are
significant advantages. E1 noted: “Ansible’s advantages (...) are it
being a well-supported IaC tool. Since there is a large community
around it, it is easier to find solutions to specific problems online.”
I1 summarized it as: “Ansible was just the hot topic at the time.”
Participants also mentioned that Ansible’s strong market presence
often led their organizations or academic institutions to mandate
its use (n = 8) (“it was standard by the time I joined the team”, I3).
Moreover, if it was not mandatory, it was often Recommended (n =
3) by colleagues or professors.
RQ2: Ansible’s adoption is influenced by its ease of use, low
barrier to entry, and agentless design. Participants highlighted
how minimal setup requirements and an approachable syntax
allowed them to manage diverse infrastructures quickly. They
also praised Ansible’s extensibility—particularly its Python-
based ecosystem. A strong community presence and wide-
spread popularity were seen as crucial.
6
RQ3: Improving Ansible
This section describes the Recommendations described in Section 3.3.3.
While participants generally acknowledged Ansible’s strengths,
they also offered concrete recommendations to improve.
Documentation and Learning Resources. A recurring concern ex-
pressed by participants (n = 10) was the need to improve documen-
tation. E4 described the current official documentation as scattered,
noting that it “is poor considering the other configuration tools
(take a look at Puppet’s). The websites are not appealing and not
properly organized. Strong concepts are scattered over different
pages.”. I3 identified specific documentation challenges regarding
module organization: “Documentation needs a big revamp: it’s not
clear what modules are built-in or part of Ansible Galaxy.”. E8 found
the documentation examples helpful but noted that “sometimes
they don’t [provide] all the examples” The participants also called
for better onboarding resources (n = 6) and more education (n =
9). As E3 put it “ When you educate beginners, they can identify
incorrect information and avoid it.”.
Debugging and Troubleshooting. Several participants highlighted
limitations in Ansible’s current debugging capabilities. Better debug-
ging tools (n = 5) and improved error messages (n = 6) were frequently
mentioned. E2 stressed that “error messages when plugins fail could
be improved,” as they can sometimes be “misleading”. I2 reinforced
this point, saying that “more specific error messages would be
very helpful. Understanding exactly where an issue presents is the
most important part of the debugging process.”. Another concept
frequently raised was the lack of rollback-on-failure support (n = 5).
Performance and Scalability. Participant also critiqued perfor-
mance and mentioned the need to improve speed (n = 7) and im-
prove parallelization (n = 4). As E2 put “Slow runs is an eternal pain
point.”. E1 advocated for integrating solutions akin to Mitogen [32],
to help optimize remote execution over SSH to reduce overhead
and B1 proposed a tag-based approach: “Having the ability to set
group tags for tasks, and have groups of tasks be able to run in
parallel would be a decent enough solution (tasks with tag A can
run in parallel with tasks with tag B).”.
Advanced Programming Capabilities. A group of participants
called for the expansion of Ansible’s programming model. While
some participants advocated for more high-level language concepts
(n = 3) — including real loops, complex conditionals, and synchro-
nization primitives — others (n = 5) stressed state management. E7,
for instance, argued for “functionality in Ansible to handle state
management effectively” and provided an extensive analysis of
Ansible’s state management limitations, saying, “even though An-
sible claims to be completely stateless, which is supposed to be
its strength, I’m not so convinced. Without state management, it’s
challenging to handle certain problems.”.
Participant Experience Levels. While some recommendations,
such as providing more education, were popular across experience
levels, other priorities varied according to participants’ familiar-
ity with Ansible. Beginners often highlighted the need for better
onboarding (n = 2) and rollback on failure (n = 3). In contrast, Expe-
rienced users (n = 4) tended to focus on improving speed and other
performance enhancements, reflecting the operational demands of
managing more extensive infrastructures.
RQ3: Interviewees emphasized the need for better documen-
tation, improved debugging, and enhanced error reporting.
Many highlighted performance optimizations, including faster
execution and parallelization, while others advocated for roll-
back support, stronger third-party integrations, and a more
user-friendly GUI to streamline workflows.
7
Discussion
This section provides a set of actionable insights and discusses the
implications of our findings for the IaC ecosystem.
7.1
Actionable Insights
This subsection proposes concrete, actionable recommendations for
improving the Ansible ecosystem and the IaC ecosystem in general.
Debugging As noted in previous studies, debugging in IaC re-
mains a significant challenge [16]. In our analysis of users’ Q&A
data, reliability challenges — particularly “Error Handling” — were
among the most frequently cited frustrations. Likewise, 10 interview
participants described how diagnosing failures becomes particu-
larly difficult when a playbook “gets stuck” with little to no logging
feedback. Multiple interviewees lamented the absence of rollback-
on-failure or built-in “step-by-step” debugging capabilities that
might elucidate the exact point of failure. Although Ansible’s state-
less design appeals to many users, it poses challenges for scenarios
requiring continuous enforcement or “undo” functionality.
For developers of IaC tools: In DevOps, where observability
and rapid troubleshooting are essential, developers should make
efforts to provide end users with comprehensive logging. Moreover,
clear guidelines, or even mandatory standards, should be estab-
lished for community-contributed modules to enforce consistent


──────── page 9/12 ────────

The Ultimate Configuration Management Tool?
Lessons from a Mixed Methods Study of Ansible’s Challenges
logging practices. IaC tools such as Ansible should develop auto-
matic rollback mechanisms to ensure recovery from failures. Such
mechanisms may rely on saving the system’s prior state or exe-
cuting compensating operations to revert unsuccessful changes.
Rollback support might enhance user confidence during IaC script
testing and facilitate recovery from unexpected behavior.
For researchers: Participants emphasized the need for better
debugging support in IaC tools as IaC tools lack the robust debug-
ging utilities available in traditional languages like C and Python.
Although Ansible offers a debugger [50], practitioners reported diffi-
culties and often resorted to shell scripts instead. Additionally, most
debugging requires manual intervention, making troubleshooting
time-consuming and prone to errors. We propose developing better
debugging and automated repair tools that identify common mis-
configurations, detect inconsistencies, and automatically suggest or
apply fixes. While repair mechanisms exist in traditional software
development, their adoption in IaC remains limited [72].
Syntax Although Ansible’s declarative approach and reliance on
YAML/Jinja2 can simplify basic configuration tasks, our analysis of
Q&A data found syntax issues with YAML, Jinja and other parts of
Ansible were the main challenges of the Usability theme. Addition-
ally, loops and conditional executions accounted for a substantial
portion of the reported difficulties. Several interviewees (n = 10)
mentioned the limitations in expressing complex logic. They de-
scribed frustrations with YAML syntax quirks (especially for loops
and conditionals), cumbersome variable handling, and a lack of
“proper” language features for advanced use cases.
For developers of IaC tools: Beyond the feedback obtained in
our study, developers have consistently identified YAML as highly
complex and error-prone. This issue is particularly concerning,
given that YAML is used not only by Ansible but also by other IaC
tools such as Kubernetes. To address this challenge, Asseldonk has
proposed replacing YAML with simpler configuration languages,
such as TOML [71]. However, to introduce higher-level language
concepts, we must go beyond configuration languages. Solutions
such as Pulumi [42] present an alternative paradigm where IaC is
implemented in imperative programming languages rather than
configuration languages such as YAML, while still maintaining
declarative features. Another example is Nix [34], which uses a
functional programming language specifically designed for pack-
age definitions. Developers of IaC tools must carefully design or
select the configuration language, as limitations in syntax and ex-
pressiveness can significantly influence the developers’ experience.
Performance Our topic modeling analysis revealed a substan-
tial volume of posts on slow execution (17.7% of the posts related
to Performance and Scalability). In interviews, seven participants
reported frustrations with performance bottlenecks, particularly
when managing hundreds of hosts. They cited sequential task exe-
cution, agentless overhead, and limited parallelization features as
key obstacles slowing down their workflows. Participants and our
Q&A data analysis converge on the need for better parallelization
and reduced overhead in large deployments.
For Ansible developers: Jetporch [25] is a Rust-based Ansible
alternative that aims to address performance limitations by avoid-
ing Python (and its inherent execution overhead) and optimizing
execution. Jetporch’s design ideas show key areas where Ansible
could improve. Ansible should undergo refactoring to introduce par-
allelization improvements, optimize SSH connections, and enable
partial execution in a more efficient manner.
For developers of IaC tools: We recommend treating per-
formance optimization as a priority. Developers should prioritize
architectural improvements that enable efficient parallel execution
across multiple hosts, optimize communication overhead (particu-
larly for agentless tools relying on SSH), and provide configurable
execution strategies for different deployment scales.
Documentation Documentation problems were mentioned more
often in the interviews than in our Q&A data (only 2% of the re-
cent posts). In our survey, eight participants flagged documentation
gaps as a pain point. Users commonly struggle to locate author-
itative references for advanced features or specialized modules.
Interviewees recounted sifting through outdated or misleading
community-contributed tutorials.
For Ansible developers: Good documentation is one of the
things that our participants liked about Ansible, so we argue that
Ansible should capitalize on this fact by improving its current docu-
mentation. Beyond traditional methods of documentation overhaul,
generative AI tools could dynamically address knowledge gaps.
LLMs could identify outdated sections by continuously parsing
documentation and flagging inaccurate sections, automatically sug-
gesting updates.
For developers of IaC tools: We recommend prioritizing com-
prehensive and well-maintained documentation. Developers should
establish clear guidelines distinguishing official modules from com-
munity contributions, maintain version-specific documentation
that is easily navigable, and implement regular audits to identify
and update outdated content. Additionally, exploring AI-assisted
documentation tools could help maintain accuracy at scale by auto-
matically detecting deprecated information and generating contex-
tual examples for edge cases.
7.2
Future Work and Broad IaC Implications
Our findings highlight key challenges and opportunities for Ansi-
ble’s evolution and offer broader insights into the trade-offs inherent
in IaC tool design.
Mixed-Methods Framework. We observe differences between
publicly discussed topics and the more subjective issues revealed
through direct interviews. While thematic areas such as “Control
Flow” or “Lack of Support” dominate forum posts, other challenges
— like documentation gaps or configuration drift — appear more
in interviews. For instance, information gaps and misleading advice
may not prompt a direct question on a forum. Practitioners may not
even realize they are facing an information gap, nor might they post
about it explicitly. Instead, they continue troubleshooting, or they
might consult colleagues offline. In interviews, however, partici-
pants openly discussed these intangible pain points — highlighting
subjective experiences. We argue that qualitative insights should
be used with quantitative or text-mining approaches to provide
a holistic understanding of IaC adoption barriers. We provide a
straightforward and replicable methodology that can be used for
other major IaC platforms (e.g., Chef, Puppet) to yield more holistic,
data-driven evaluations of challenges that practitioners face.


──────── page 10/12 ────────

Carreira et al.
Balancing Usability and Scalability. User experience seems to
vary by expertise level. Beginners emphasize documentation clarity,
onboarding simplicity, and accessible debugging tools. Meanwhile,
advanced practitioners advocate for performance optimizations
(e.g., concurrency) and advanced programming capabilities. This
suggests that IaC tools should provide tiered user experiences —
offering simplified workflows for beginners while exposing ad-
vanced performance optimizations and parallelization capabilities
for experts. Striking this balance seems to be important to ensure
long-term adoption across skill levels.
Documentation Gaps are a Universal Problem. Finally, doc-
umentation gaps and information drift are well-documented chal-
lenges across software systems, and our findings confirm their
presence in Ansible as well. While well-developed official documen-
tation can lower the barrier to entry [2, 57], many tools struggle to
keep pace with rapid feature expansion and a growing user base [1].
Establishing centralized, consistently updated repositories of best
practices and official modules is important for sustained usability.
8
Threats to Validity
Threats to Internal Validity. A threat arises from the use of LLMs
through TopicGPT. LLMs are prone to hallucination and can gen-
erate unreliable results, potentially affecting the precision of our
findings. To mitigate this, we perform manual validation in two
stages: (1) during the generation of the topic list, and (2) during
the assignment of topics to individual posts. Also, conducting semi-
structured interviews introduces risks such as interviewer bias,
where the phrasing or emphasis of questions might influence par-
ticipant responses. To minimize this, we followed a consistent in-
terview protocol and performed pilots before deploying the study.
Threats to External Validity. Practitioners can discuss Ansible
issues on alternative Q&A platforms that we did not analyze, po-
tentially limiting the representativeness of our findings. To mit-
igate this, we collected posts from three distinct platforms. An-
other threat is that while some of our findings may generalize
to other IaC tools, particularly configuration management tools,
more research is needed to confirm their applicability. Future stud-
ies should explore other IaC tools to assess the generalizability of
our results. Regarding the interviews, we recruited participants
primarily through online channels, so our sample may not be repre-
sentative of the broader Ansible user community. Self-selection bias
may have resulted in participants who are more engaged with the
tool or have stronger opinions about it. Furthermore, our sample’s
distribution across expertise levels may not accurately reflect the
actual distribution in the community.
9
Related Work
To identify challenges that practitioners face in IaC, Rahman et al.
analyzed 2,758 Puppet-related questions from Stack Overflow [45].
They used qualitative analysis to identify 16 major categories of
questions. Many of these categories, including Syntax Error and
Filesystem, are also observed in our study. While Rahman et al.’s
study focuses on Puppet, our study focuses on Ansible, which, as of
2024, is a more widely used technology for configuration manage-
ment of services. Furthermore, Rahman et al. analyzed questions
posted between January 2010 and December 2016, while our inter-
views and posts reflect the scenario as of 2024.
Guerriero et al. conducted 44 semi-structured interviews with
IaC practitioners to examine adoption and development practices,
available tools, and the needs and challenges of working with
IaC [16]. Similarly to our study, they highlight issues such as difficul-
ties with testing and debugging. However, we provide a more gran-
ular and in-depth analysis, as well as the identification of unique
issues of Ansible, such as issues with loops and Jinja.
Begoug et al. collected 52,692 questions and 64,078 responses
from Stack Overflow to investigate challenges developers encounter
with IaC [7]. The dataset includes questions related to Ansible, Pu-
lumi, Terraform, CloudFormation, and other IaC technologies. The
authors grouped questions into topics using the Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) method optimized with a Genetic Algorithm (GA)
for parameter fine-tuning. Our analysis of practitioners’ questions
follows a similar approach. However, we collected data from two
additional sources: Reddit and the Ansible forum. Additionally, in-
stead of using LDA, we use TopicGPT, which not only provides
interpretable topics but also produces topics that align better with
human categorizations [39]. We both found common topics such
as File Management and Templating, but we found additional chal-
lenges faced by practitioners such as Jinja and AWX issues. Another
key distinction between our study and those described above is
that while they focus either on interviews or on questions posted
by practitioners, our study employs a mixed-method approach that
integrates data from both sources.
To the best of our knowledge, the only other mixed methods
study related to IaC challenges is the one conducted by Tanzil et
al. [70]. However, their study is broader, addressing DevOps chal-
lenges in general, with IaC as just one category. They used LDA to
perform topic modeling on approximately 174,000 Stack Overflow
posts, identifying 23 distinct topics. These were then grouped into
four categories, with IaC being one of them, encompassing seven
specific subtopics. Finally, the authors validated and extended their
findings with a survey of 21 professional DevOps practitioners.
Although there is some overlap in the findings between our study
and that of Tanzil et al. (e.g., both identify challenges related to File
Management and Syntax), we focus exclusively on challenges re-
lated to Ansible and IaC, which provides a more focused scope with
different insights such as difficulties with loops and conditionals.
We also employ a different topic modeling approach and focus on
interviews over surveys.
10
Conclusion
We combined a large-scale quantitative analysis of 59,157 online An-
sible discussions with 20 practitioner interviews to identify key chal-
lenges, contextualize their real-world impact, and propose solutions.
We found issues related to control flow, performance bottlenecks,
limited debugging capabilities, and inconsistent documentation,
highlighting the tensions among usability, flexibility, and scalability
within Ansible’s ecosystem. We offer concrete recommendations
and show how Ansible can better evolve to serve novice users and
large-scale deployments. These contributions, alongside broader
reflections on community-driven knowledge, provide a replicable
roadmap for assessing and improving IaC solutions.


──────── page 11/12 ────────

The Ultimate Configuration Management Tool?
Lessons from a Mixed Methods Study of Ansible’s Challenges
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Claúdia Mamede, who helped us design our
main diagram. This work was supported by FCT, Fundação para
a Ciência e a Tecnologia under grants PRT/BD/153739/2021 and
BD/04736/2023, and projects UIDB/50021/2020 (DOI: 10.54499/UIDB/
50021/2020), LA/P/0063/2020 (DOI: 10.54499/LA/P/0063/2020), and
2024.07411.IACDC.
References
[1] Emad Aghajani, Csaba Nagy, Mario Linares-Vásquez, Laura Moreno, Gabriele
Bavota, Michele Lanza, and David C Shepherd. 2020. Software documentation:
the practitioners’ perspective. In Proceedings of the acm/ieee 42nd international
conference on software engineering. 590–601.
[2] Emad Aghajani, Csaba Nagy, Olga Lucero Vega-Márquez, Mario Linares-Vásquez,
Laura Moreno, Gabriele Bavota, and Michele Lanza. 2019. Software documenta-
tion issues unveiled. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1199–1210.
[3] Amazon Web Services, Inc. 2011. AWS CloudFormation: Infrastructure as Code &
AWS Resource Provisioning. https://aws.amazon.com/cloudformation. Accessed:
2025-03-10.
[4] Ansible project contributors. 2025. Ansible Community Documentation. https:
//docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest Accessed 03-03-2025.
[5] Claus Boye Asmussen and Charles Møller. 2019. Smart literature review: a
practical topic modelling approach to exploratory literature review. Journal of
Big Data 6, 1 (2019), 1–18.
[6] Sebastian Baltes and Stephan Diehl. 2016. Worse than spam: Issues in sampling
software developers. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM/IEEE international symposium
on empirical software engineering and measurement. 1–6.
[7] Mahi Begoug, Narjes Bessghaier, Ali Ouni, Eman Abdullah AlOmar, and Mo-
hamed Wiem Mkaouer. 2023. What do infrastructure-as-code practitioners
discuss: An empirical study on stack overflow. In 2023 ACM/IEEE International
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM). IEEE,
1–12.
[8] Mahi Begoug, Moataz Chouchen, Ali Ouni, Eman Abdullah Alomar, and Mo-
hamed Wiem Mkaouer. 2024. Fine-grained just-in-time defect prediction at the
block level in Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC). In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories. 100–112.
[9] Narjes Bessghaier, Mahi Begoug, Chemseddine Mebarki, Ali Ouni, Mohammed
Sayagh, and Mohamed Wiem Mkaouer. 2024. On the prevalence, co-occurrence,
and impact of infrastructure-as-code smells. In 2024 IEEE International Conference
on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 23–34.
[10] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101.
[11] Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational
and psychological measurement 20, 1 (1960), 37–46.
[12] Barbara DiCicco-Bloom and Benjamin F Crabtree. 2006. The qualitative research
interview. Medical education 40, 4 (2006), 314–321.
[13] James Fryman. 2014. DNS outage post mortem. https://github.blog/2014-01-18-
dns-outage-post-mortem/ Accessed: 3 May 2022.
[14] GitLab. 2014. Gitlab.com Downtime 2014-07-07 Postmortem. https://docs.google.
com/document/d/1ScqXAdb6BjhsDzCo3qdPYbt1uULzgZqPO8zHeHHarS0 [Ac-
cessed 04-09-2024].
[15] gooeyblob. 2016. Why Reddit was down on Aug 11. https://web.archive.org/
web/20221029203405/https://www.reddit.com/r/announcements/comments/
4y0m56/why_reddit_was_down_on_aug_11/ [Accessed 04-09-2024].
[16] Michele Guerriero, Martin Garriga, Damian A Tamburri, and Fabio Palomba.
2019. Adoption, support, and challenges of infrastructure-as-code: Insights
from industry. In 2019 IEEE International conference on software maintenance and
evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 580–589.
[17] Hacker News User gizdan. 2021. Ansible Techniques I Wish I’d Known Ear-
lier.
https://web.archive.org/web/20220611223833/https://news.ycombinator.
com/item?id=28332684#expand Accessed: 2025-03-14.
[18] HashiCorp. 2024. Terraform by HashiCorp. https://www.terraform.io/ Accessed
13-09-2024.
[19] Md Mahadi Hassan, John Salvador, Shubhra Kanti Karmaker Santu, and Akond
Rahman. 2024. State Reconciliation Defects in Infrastructure as Code. Proceedings
of the ACM on Software Engineering 1, FSE (2024), 1865–1888.
[20] Rebecca Hersher. 2017.
Amazon and the $150 Million typo.
https:
//www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/03/03/518322734/amazon-and-the-
150-million-typo?t=1651588365675 Accessed: 3 May 2022.
[21] Honeycomb. 2021. Incident Resolution: Do You Remember, the Twenty Fires of
September? https://www.honeycomb.io/blog/incident-resolution-september-
retrospective [Accessed 04-09-2024].
[22] Victoria Jackson, André Van Der Hoek, and Rafael Prikladnicki. 2024.
Co-
Creation in Fully Remote Software Teams. In 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 604–615. doi:10.1145/3597503.3623297
[23] Carina Jacobi, Wouter Van Atteveldt, and Kasper Welbers. 2018. Quantitative
analysis of large amounts of journalistic texts using topic modelling. In Rethinking
research methods in an age of digital journalism. Routledge, 89–106.
[24] Jan David Nose. 2023. DNS Outage on 2023-01-25. https://blog.rust-lang.org/
inside-rust/2023/02/08/dns-outage-portmortem.html [Accessed 04-09-2024].
[25] Jetporch Contributors. 2025. Jetporch - the Jet Enterprise Professional Orches-
trator. https://github.com/jetporch/jetporch Accessed 15-03-2025.
[26] Lena Karlsson, Åsa G Dahlstedt, Björn Regnell, Johan Natt och Dag, and Anne
Persson. 2007. Requirements engineering challenges in market-driven software
development–An interview study with practitioners. Information and Software
technology 49, 6 (2007), 588–604.
[27] J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch. 1977. The measurement of observer agreement
for categorical data. biometrics (1977), 159–174.
[28] Thomas D LaToza and Brad A Myers. 2010. Developers ask reachability ques-
tions. In Proceedings of the 32Nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software
Engineering-Volume 1. 185–194.
[29] Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, and Harry Hochheiser. 2017. Research
methods in human-computer interaction. Morgan Kaufmann.
[30] Julien Lepiller, Ruzica Piskac, Martin Schäf, and Mark Santolucito. 2021. Ana-
lyzing infrastructure as code to prevent intra-update sniping vulnerabilities. In
Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems: 27th Interna-
tional Conference, TACAS 2021, Held as Part of the European Joint Conferences
on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2021, Luxembourg City, Luxembourg,
March 27–April 1, 2021, Proceedings, Part II 27. Springer, 105–123.
[31] Khalid Mahmood. 2016. Do people overestimate their information literacy
skills? A systematic review of empirical evidence on the Dunning-Kruger effect.
Communications in Information Literacy 10, 2 (2016), 3.
[32] Mitogen Contributors. 2025.
Mitogen for Ansible.
https://mitogen.
networkgenomics.com/ansible_detailed.html Accessed 15-03-2025.
[33] NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. 2023. SIGNAL: Summer 2023. SIGNAL Sum-
mer 2023 (2023). https://tempo.gsfc.nasa.gov/static-files/SIGNAL%20Summer%
202023.pdf Accessed: 2025-03-10.
[34] NixOS Contributors. 2025. Nix & NixOS. https://nixos.org/ Accessed 29-09-2025.
[35] Ruben Opdebeeck. 2024.
Static Analysis for Quality Assurance of Ansible
Infrastructure-as-Code Artefacts. Ph. D. Dissertation. Vrije Universiteit Brussel.
[36] Ruben Opdebeeck, Ahmed Zerouali, and Coen De Roover. 2022. Smelly variables
in ansible infrastructure code: Detection, prevalence, and lifetime. In Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories. 61–72.
[37] Ruben Opdebeeck, Ahmed Zerouali, and Coen De Roover. 2023. Control and data
flow in security smell detection for infrastructure as code: Is it worth the effort?.
In 2023 IEEE/ACM 20th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories
(MSR). IEEE, 534–545.
[38] Perforce. 2024. Puppet Infrastructure & IT Automation at Scale. https://www.
puppet.com/ Accessed 13-09-2024.
[39] Chau Pham, Alexander Hoyle, Simeng Sun, Philip Resnik, and Mohit Iyyer. 2024.
TopicGPT: A Prompt-based Topic Modeling Framework. In Proceedings of the 2024
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2956–2984.
[40] Progress. 2024. Chef Software DevOps Automation Solutions. https://www.chef.
io/ Accessed 13-09-2024.
[41] PullPush team. 2025. PullPush Reddit API.
https://pullpush.io/ Accessed
20-02-2025.
[42] Pulumi. 2025. Pulumi - Infrastructure as Code in Any Programming Language.
https://www.pulumi.com/ Accessed 15-03-2025.
[43] Akond Rahman, Effat Farhana, Chris Parnin, and Laurie Williams. 2020. Gang
of eight: A defect taxonomy for infrastructure as code scripts. In 2020 IEEE/ACM
42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 752–764.
[44] Akond Rahman, Chris Parnin, and Laurie Williams. 2019. The seven sins: Security
smells in infrastructure as code scripts. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 164–175.
[45] Akond Rahman, Asif Partho, Patrick Morrison, and Laurie Williams. 2018. What
questions do programmers ask about configuration as code?. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Workshop on Rapid Continuous Software Engineering. 16–22.
[46] Akond Rahman, Md Rayhanur Rahman, Chris Parnin, and Laurie Williams. 2021.
Security smells in ansible and chef scripts: A replication study. ACM Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 30, 1 (2021), 1–31.
[47] Akond Rahman, Shazibul Islam Shamim, Dibyendu Brinto Bose, and Rahul
Pandita. 2023. Security misconfigurations in open source kubernetes manifests:
An empirical study. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
32, 4 (2023), 1–36.
[48] Akond Rahman and Laurie Williams. 2018. Characterizing defective configu-
ration scripts used for continuous deployment. In 2018 IEEE 11th International
conference on software testing, verification and validation (ICST). IEEE, 34–45.
[49] Red Hat. 2024. Ansible. https://www.ansible.com/ Accessed 13-09-2024.


──────── page 12/12 ────────

Carreira et al.
[50] Red Hat. 2025. Ansible - Debugging tasks. https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/
latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_debugger.html Accessed 29-09-2025.
[51] Red Hat. 2025. Ansible Forum. https://forum.ansible.com/ Accessed 20-02-2025.
[52] Red Hat. 2025. Ansible Forum. https://forum.ansible.com/t/important-ansible-
google-group-moving-to-ansible-forum/38853 Accessed 21-02-2025.
[53] Red Hat, Inc. 2023. Siemens standardizes on Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform
for DevOps. Case Study. Red Hat, Inc. https://www.redhat.com/en/resources/
siemens-case-study Accessed: 2025-03-10.
[54] Reddit. 2025. Reddit. https://www.reddit.com Accessed 20-02-2025.
[55] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings
using siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084 (2019).
[56] Sofia Reis, Rui Abreu, Marcelo d’Amorim, and Daniel Fortunato. 2022. Leveraging
practitioners’ feedback to improve a security linter. In Proceedings of the 37th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering. 1–12.
[57] Martin P Robillard. 2009. What makes APIs hard to learn? Answers from devel-
opers. IEEE software 26, 6 (2009), 27–34.
[58] Tobias Roehm, Rebecca Tiarks, Rainer Koschke, and Walid Maalej. 2012. How
do professional developers comprehend software?. In 2012 34th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 255–265.
[59] Nuno Saavedra and João F Ferreira. 2022. GLITCH: Automated Polyglot Security
Smell Detection in Infrastructure as Code. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering.
[60] Nuno Saavedra, João F Ferreira, and Alexandra Mendes. 2025.
InfraFix:
Technology-Agnostic Repair of Infrastructure as Code.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.17220 (2025).
[61] Nuno Saavedra, João Gonçalves, Miguel Henriques, João F Ferreira, and Alexan-
dra Mendes. 2023. Polyglot Code Smell Detection for Infrastructure as Code
with GLITCH. In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering.
[62] Julian Schwarz, Andreas Steffens, and Horst Lichter. 2018. Code smells in infras-
tructure as code. In 2018 11Th international conference on the quality of information
and communications technology (QUATIC). IEEE, 220–228.
[63] Tushar Sharma, Marios Fragkoulis, and Diomidis Spinellis. 2016. Does your
configuration code smell?. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on
mining software repositories. 189–200.
[64] Thodoris Sotiropoulos, Dimitris Mitropoulos, and Diomidis Spinellis. 2020. Prac-
tical fault detection in puppet programs. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd
International Conference on Software Engineering. 26–37.
[65] Stack Exchange. 2025. Stack Exchange API.
https://api.stackexchange.com
Accessed 20-02-2025.
[66] Stack Exchange. 2025. Stack Overflow. https://stackoverflow.com Accessed
20-02-2025.
[67] Stack Exchange Network. 2014.
Outage Post-Mortem: August 25th,
2014. https://web.archive.org/web/20201020103424/https://stackstatus.net/post/
96025967369/outage-post-mortem-august-25th-2014 [Accessed 04-09-2024].
[68] Stack Overflow. 2024. Stack Overflow Developer Survey 2024. https://survey.
stackoverflow.co/2024/ [Accessed 03-09-2024].
[69] Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Massimiliano Di Penta,
Daniel M German, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2024.
BOMs Away! Inside the
Minds of Stakeholders: A Comprehensive Study of Bills of Materials for Software
Systems. In 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE). 517–529. doi:10.1145/3597503.3623347
[70] Minaoar Hossain Tanzil, Masud Sarker, Gias Uddin, and Anindya Iqbal. 2023. A
mixed method study of DevOps challenges. Information and Software Technology
161 (2023), 107244.
[71] Tom Preston-Werner. 2025. TOML: Tom’s Obvious Minimal Language. https:
//toml.io/ Accessed 29-09-2025.
[72] Aaron Weiss, Arjun Guha, and Yuriy Brun. 2017. Tortoise: Interactive system con-
figuration repair. In 2017 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 625–636.
[73] Wikimedia. 2017. Incidents/2017-01-18 Labs. https://wikitech.wikimedia.org/
wiki/Incidents/2017-01-18_Labs [Accessed 04-09-2024].
[74] Shuang-Hong Yang, Alek Kolcz, Andy Schlaikjer, and Pankaj Gupta. 2014. Large-
scale high-precision topic modeling on twitter. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. 1907–
1916.
[75] Ahmed Zerouali, Ruben Opdebeeck, and Coen De Roover. 2023. Helm charts
for Kubernetes applications: Evolution, outdatedness and security risks. In 2023
IEEE/ACM 20th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR).
IEEE, 523–533.
