

──────── page 1/22 ────────

1
Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
YIWEN DONG∗, University of Waterloo, Canada
ZHEYANG LI∗, University of Waterloo, Canada
YONGQIANG TIAN, University of Waterloo, Canada
CHENGNIAN SUN†, University of Waterloo, Canada
MICHAEL W. GODFREY, University of Waterloo, Canada
MEIYAPPAN NAGAPPAN, University of Waterloo, Canada
The Bourne-again shell (Bash) is a prevalent scripting language for orchestrating shell commands and managing
resources in Unix-like environments. It is one of the mainstream shell dialects that is available on most GNU
Linux systems. However, the unique syntax and semantics of Bash could easily lead to unintended behaviors if
carelessly used. Prior studies primarily focused on improving reliability of Bash scripts or facilitating writing
Bash scripts; there is yet no empirical study on the characteristics of Bash programs written in reality, e.g.,
frequently used language features, common code smells and bugs.
In this paper, we perform a large-scale empirical study of Bash usage, based on analyses over one million
open-source Bash scripts found in Github repositories. We identify and discuss which features and utilities
of Bash are most often used. Using static analysis, we find that Bash scripts are often error prone, and the
error-proneness has a moderately positive correlation with the size of the scripts. We also find that the most
common problem areas concern quoting, resource management, command options, permissions, and error
handling. We envision that these findings can be beneficial for learning Bash and future research that aims to
improve shell and command-line productivity and reliability.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering →Language features; • General and reference →Empir-
ical studies.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: empirical studies, shell scripts, bash, language features, code smells, bugs
ACM Reference Format:
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan.
2022. Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 1, 1, Article 1
(January 2022), 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3517193
1
INTRODUCTION
A shell is a program that serves as a command-line interface to an operating system such as Unix;
the ability to create scripts using a shell language allows developers to effectively orchestrate the
∗Both authors contributed equally to the paper.
†Corresponding author.
Authors’ addresses: Yiwen Dong, y225dong@uwaterloo.ca, University of Waterloo, Canada; Zheyang Li, z942li@uwaterloo.
ca, University of Waterloo, Canada; Yongqiang Tian, y258tian@uwaterloo.ca, University of Waterloo, Canada; Chengnian
Sun, cnsun@uwaterloo.ca, University of Waterloo, Canada; Michael W. Godfrey, migod@uwaterloo.ca, University of
Waterloo, Canada; Meiyappan Nagappan, mei.nagappan@uwaterloo.ca, University of Waterloo, Canada.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
1049-331X/2022/1-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3517193
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 2/22 ────────

1:2
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
interactions of command-line tools and to manage system resources. Because of their power and
utility, shell languages such as sh, Bash, and zsh are among the most popular languages in common
use; they are among the top ten most popular languages in Github, based on the number of unique
contributors [16]. However, unlike other popular, general-purpose programming languages such
as C, Java, Scala, Rust, JavaScript and Python, shell languages are domain-specific, designed to
facilitate the interactions between humans and operating systems. Shell languages can be difficult
to learn and are well known for having unintuitive syntax and semantics [10, 17]. For example,
if a variable has a string value which contains whitespaces (whitespaces are the default internal
field separators, known as IFS [1]), the retrieval of the variable value would be split by the IFS and
becomes multiple words. In Figure 1a, the variable x does not contain any whitespace and the script
will correctly execute because no default word splitting will be applied to the variable x. However,
in Figure 1b, word splitting would be applied to variable x because of the change from dashes
to whitespace characters. It would cause $x to be substituted with the literal values this is a
sentence. Thus, the predicate will become if [ this is a sentence = "..." ], which causes
a syntax error when the if statement is executed. The way to avoid such behavior is to double quote
the variable "$x", so that the predicate can be interpreted as the comparison between two strings:
if [ "this is a sentence" = "..." ]. Even so, do not be fooled into thinking quoting once is
enough. Suppose in Figure 1c the script checks the output from running a script called test.bash
inside a directory called test folder. The outer quote surrounding "$(...)" keeps the output
from test.bash script from being expanded as seen in Figure 1b. However, without using double
quotes also for "$x", the Bash shell behaves unexpectedly as x expands into the command test
with the argument folder/test.bash rather than running the file we expected.
#!/bin/bash
x="this -is -a-sentence"
if [ $x = "..." ]; # No syntax error
then
...
fi
(a) Example of no word splitting
#!/bin/bash
x="this is a sentence"
-- if [ $x = "..." ];
# Syntax error
++ if [ "$x" = "..." ]; # Correct usage
then
...
fi
(b) Example of word splitting
#!/bin/bash
x="test folder/test.bash"
-- if [ "$( $x )" = "..." ];
# Silently fails
++ if [ "$( "$x" )" = "..." ]; # Correct usage
then
...
fi
(c) Example of word splitting in subshell
Fig. 1. Example of syntax error as a result of word splitting when there are space characters in the string
assigned to a variable in a Bash script.
Due to Bash’s sensitivity to whitespaces, extra care has to be taken for using variables, brackets
etc., something that is normally simple in regular general-purpose programming languages. These
two examples of word splitting above show one of the many subtleties in Bash and other shell
languages. The remainder of this paper will discuss other characteristics/subtleties of Bash. For
example, many Bash features involve expansions such as variable expansion, filename expansion
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 3/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:3
and tilde expansion. However, the expansion model that specifies the expansion order can be
difficult to follow and understand once multiple expansions are compounded with each other. These
are only the tip of the iceberg that showcase the unintuitive side of Bash. Bash syntax and semantics
can easily lead to unintended behaviors if developers are not aware of the nuances, and all these
characteristics can easily make shell scripting error-prone and difficult to maintain.
To combat the error-proneness nature of shell scripts, there has been an increasing interest in
improving code quality of shell scripts by using various tools. For instance, ShellCheck [21], an
open-source static analysis tool in Github with 22,000+ stars, is designed to find subtle syntactic
or simple semantic issues in shell scripts, supporting a variety of shell dialects. Its popularity
implies the high demand in improving the quality of shell scripts. Further, there are studies such as
Bash2py [10] that converts Bash scripts to Python scripts, NL2Bash [26] and NLC2CMD challenge
(English to Bash) in the project CLAI [2] from IBM that aim to improve shell productivity by
utilizing techniques from NLP and machine learning. These studies introduce a way to circumvent
the shortcomings of writing shell scripts by converting shell scripts to or from different languages
that are easier to maintain and debug.
However, these existing efforts do not answer a critical question to improve the shell quality,
that is, what are the fundamental facts and characteristics of shell language usage in reality? It
is currently unclear how and how well developers are using shell language features and utilities
in practice. It is also unclear what are the common code smells or faults in shell scripts. Without
understanding such questions, it will be difficult for researchers to improve the quality of shell
scripts. The answers to these questions will give us a better understanding of the current state of
shell language usage. It will help developers in writing better shell scripts and help future studies
in improving shell and command-line productivity and reliability.
In this paper, we strive to answer these questions above by conducting a large-scale empirical
study on the usage of shell scripts. More specifically, we focused on Bash, one of the mainstream
shells and the default one in many Unix-like systems. We leveraged the abundant source code from
the open-source community by gathering and statically analyzing over one million Bash scripts in
Github. Then we followed up with a manual inspection to study the evolution of Bash scripts. We
manually inspected 200 bug-fixing commits of Bash scripts and performed thematic-analysis to
identify common bugs that developers encounter during the Bash script development. Overall, we
attempted to answer the following research questions:
RQ1 What are the commonly used language features and utilities in Bash scripts?
RQ2 How frequently do code smells occur in Bash scripts? What are the common code smells?
RQ3 What are the most common bugs that arise in Bash scripts as Bash scripts evolve?
With the above RQs, we aim to shed some light on the usage of Bash language features and
utilities, the Bash script quality and code smells, and the characteristics of common bugs found
in the evolution of Bash scripts. We believe that having insight of practical Bash usage would
be beneficial for new Bash practitioners and for future research in command-line tooling, shell
productivity and reliability improvements. From the 1.3 million Bash scripts collected, we found the
most commonly used utilities are file, path, and directory related. Yet from ShellCheck, code smells
with regards to quoting, word splitting etc. are the most commonly reported. Through manual
analysis of the bug fixing commits, we determined that quoting, along with file, path, and directory
management were both the top sources of error in Bash. We made recommendations to Bash
practitioners and future tool developers for ways to reduce the number of bugs in Bash scripts.
This paper makes the following contributions.
(1) We empirically identified the common language features and utilities used in Bash scripts.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 4/22 ────────

1:4
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
(2) We empirically showed that Bash script sizes and the number of code smells have a moderately
positive correlation.
(3) We empirically identified the common themes of code smells and bugs in open-source Bash
scripts.
(4) To ensure reproducibility and for benefit of the community, we have made all our data and
code publicly available at http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5732299 [25].
2
BACKGROUND
2.1
History of Bash
The term "shell" refers to a command-line interface and a type of scripting language designed for
orchestrating tools and managing resources in the Unix-like environment. It first began with Ken
Thompson in Bell Labs in 1971 when Unix was first introduced [29]. There were several utilities
provided by the shell such as glob for wildcard expansion and pattern matching, if command to
execute statements conditionally, simple redirection, command separator with “;” and background
processes with “&”.
The Bourne shell, known as sh in the V7 UNIX, was developed by Stephen Bourne at AT&T Bell
Labs in 1977 [23]. The Bourne shell brought the concept of control flows, loops, and variables into
shell scripts and it became the inspiration for many later derivative shells [5]. The Bourne-again
shell, commonly known as Bash, is one such derivative intended to replace the Bourne shell. As
a GNU project written in 1988 by Brian Fox, Bash has become one of the mainstream shells and
it is the standard shell included in many GNU Linux distributions such as Ubuntu and Fedora.
The latest version of Bash, Bash 5.0 was released in January 2019, celebrating 30 years of active
development [13].
Despite Bash having decades of history and being prevalent in Unix-like systems, it is an extension
to the Bourne shell and it inherits all the shell syntax and semantics for the sake of backward
compatibility, which are unfortunately unintuitive. For instance, commands in shell scripts are
sensitive to whitespaces as seen in Figure 1. This incurs extra development challenges to developers
and may easily lead to bugs.
There have been prior studies addressing the usability issues of Bash as mentioned in Section 1.
There is also an anecdotal list of common Bash mistakes compiled by users in the Bash community
called Bash Pitfalls [18]. We discuss the related work in the Section 7. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no any large-scale empirical research studying the usage of Bash language.
2.2
Bash Language Features
Shell programs usually serve as the glue code in the UNIX-like environments to control the execution
of external programs in an interpretation manner. Compared to traditional general-purpose high-
level programming languages such as C++ and Python that have rich language features and libraries,
Bash and other shell languages have a limited set of features that is domain specific and mostly
designed for tasks in the shell environment.
This section briefly introduces some Bash features to facilitate the understanding of the study.
More details on the language features can be found in the Bash manual [14].
2.2.1
Parameter Expansion & Special Parameters. Parameter expansion is used to expand the value
of a variable. The most basic form is ${var} where the expansion returns the value of the variable
var. There are many other parameter expansion rules that perform a variety of substitutions to the
variable. For example ${var:=word} would return the value of var if it is not empty, otherwise it
assigns the expansion of word to var and returns the newly assigned value.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 5/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:5
There are several constant variables that have special meanings. To name a few, there are $? that
refers to the exit status of the most recent executed program in Bash, $0 that refers the name of the
current Bash script, $* and $@ that expand to all the positional parameters of the command-line
arguments used in invoking the current script.
Pitfall Example.
We showed an example of a common parameter expansion bug in the intro-
duction (Figure 1).
2.2.2
Pipeline. Pipeline (|) is a shell language feature that creates a chain of commands. It is in
the form of
cmd1 | cmd2 | · · · | cmd𝑛
where the output of a command is passed as input to the next command in the pipeline.
Pitfall Example.
Error handling with piped commands is tricky as only the exit code of the last
command in a pipeline is preserved by default. Even if cmd2 failed, the script could still continue
with the developer completely oblivious to the failure.
2.2.3
Redirection. Similar to the pipeline feature, redirection (i.e., <, >, >>) redirects the input and
output of a command and it often deals with UNIX file handles such as standard input and standard
output. There are a variety of redirection rules in Bash but the basic redirection rule is in the form of
cmd > file where the output of cmd is redirected as the standard input to the file file, effectively
writing the standard output of cmd to the given file.
Pitfall Example.
Redirection is error prone as the order of redirection matter. To redirect both
standard output and standard error to an file, standard output must be redirected first before
redirecting standard error to standard output like so cmd >file 2>&1. Otherwise standard output
will be redirected to file but standard error will be redirected to the original standard output not
file.
2.2.4
Command Substitution. Command substitution is in the form of $(cmd) where the command
cmd is run in a separate shell environment and $(cmd) is replaced by the standard output of the
command. For example, TMP_DIR=$(mktemp -d) runs the command mktemp -d in a subshell to
create a temporary directory and assigns the temporary directory name to the variable TMP_DIR.
Pitfall Example.
We showed an example of a command substitution bug in the introduction (Fig-
ure 1c).
2.2.5
Filename Expansion. Commonly referred to as globbing, filename expansion allows wild card
characters (e.g. *,?) to be used to match all files that fit a certain pattern. The pattern *.txt matches
all files in the directory that ends in .txt. For loops often use filename expansion to process all
files that match a certain pattern (e.g. for file in *.txt ; do).
Pitfall Example.
Filename expansion while useful, can be dangerous because in the case where
the pattern does not match any files, the variable file in the above for loop example will be set to
the string *.txt which is not a file that exists. The for loop will be run once rather than skipped
over in the case no file matches the expansion pattern.
3
DATA COLLECTION
The overall collection process is illustrated in Figure 2. We first collected the Bash scripts and the
relevant metadata such as commit history and messages using Github API. Then for each script,
we leveraged the IntelliJ Shell parser and ShellCheck to conduct various analyses. To produce the
parse trees, we created a standalone, headless application using the IntelliJ Shell parser that takes
in a Bash script and returns a parse tree. Details on the parse tree are discussed in Section 4.2. We
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 6/22 ────────

1:6
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
also ran ShellCheck which takes in a Bash script and produces a report with a list of issues found
by ShellCheck. Details on the ShellCheck reports are discussed in Section 5.2.
Github
Bash scripts
ShellCheck
Reports
Database
IntelliJ
Parser
Parse trees
Commit message and other metadata
Fig. 2. Data Collection Process
In this study, we collected two corpora of Bash scripts: a general corpus and a top 1K corpus.
General Dataset.
We first collected a corpus of 1,352,768 distinct Bash scripts from 516,659
public Github repositories to understand the general Bash usage.
Top 1K Dataset.
To further investigate whether the more popular scripts have different charac-
teristics than the general Bash scripts, we collected an extra corpus of 14,387 Bash scripts from
the top 1,000 public shell repositories ranked by Github repository stars. The Github star is a
measurement of developers’ interests. We used the same assumption made in Ray et al.’s study [3]
that star count is an indication of popularity and we adopted such scheme to identify popular Bash
scripts. The Bash scripts were extracted from each repository using the same code search process
as discussed in Section 3.1 without specifying size limits.
During the Bash script collection process, any entry that appeared in both Bash corpora was
only kept in the smaller corpus, ensuring that no duplicate elements exist across the two datasets.
Bash scripts with the same SHA hashes were considered as one in the following evaluations and
were analyzed once to reduce bias in the results.
3.1
Bash Script Code Search (Github API)
To collect the Bash scripts, we used the Github Code Search API1 with the following parameters:
(1) Keyword: bash
(2) Qualifier 1: in:file
(3) Qualifier 2: language:shell
(4) Qualifier 3: size:n...n+1 where n ranges from 0 to 49999
Github uses the tool Linguist2 to detect the language of files and labels all varieties of shell scripts
(e.g., Zsh, Ksh, Bash) as “shell”. To ensure that we only have Bash scripts, we used the keyword
"bash" in the API and performed filtering locally based on the Bash shebang3 with the following
regular expression:
1https://docs.github.com/en/rest/reference/search#search-code
2https://github.com/github/linguist
3Shebang is the first line of code in a shell script that specifies the interpreter, e.g., “#!/bin/bash”.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 7/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:7
^#!.*[\/\\\s](bash)\b
The Github API itself also has several limitations:
(1) Only the default branch is considered.
(2) Only files smaller than 384 KB are searchable.
(3) You must always include at least one search term when searching source code.
(4) Query returns a maximum of 1,000 results.
Due to the fourth limitation of GitHub API that it can only return one thousand results per query,
we constructed 25,000 queries with each only looking for files within specific file size range in
byte(s). In the end, we used the following list of byte ranges: 0-1, 2-3, ..., 49,997-49,998, 49,999-50,000.
Github Code Search can return files with size up to 384KB, but we realized during the data collection
process that the amount of shell scripts returned per query quickly declined after the query qualifier
of file size was set to 10,000 bytes and above. We decided to stop our queries at the byte range of
49,999-50,000 bytes to collect a good amount of samples within a reasonable time frame. In the end,
we collected 1,352,768 Bash scripts in total, which constitutes a sufficiently large corpus for our
studies.
4
RQ1: WHAT ARE THE COMMONLY USED LANGUAGE FEATURES AND UTILITIES
IN BASH SCRIPTS?
4.1
Motivation
Two important aspects of a programming language are the available language features and libraries.
In this case, Bash is a scripting language that has its own language features and it often serves
as the glue code for many utilities in the Unix-like environment. To examine the usage of Bash
language, we want to first investigate and identify the core usage of Bash language features and
utilities.
We believe that such information would be useful for future research in Bash tooling or for new
Bash practitioners. For example, command line repair/conversion tools such as Bash2Py [10] and
NL2Bash [26] can prioritize working on the common utilities to improve their efficiency. Beginners
of Bash can prioritize the language features and utilities when learning Bash.
4.2
Approach
We approached this question by first defining the scope of language features and utilities, and
then generating a parse tree for each collected Bash script from Github. Instead of computing the
raw frequency of feature and utility usage from each file, we computed the relative frequency of
files that contain certain features and utilities to prevent large or repetitive files from skewing the
results. That is, if a file contains multiple uses of a language feature or utility, we only count that
file once.
Language Features.
To investigate the usage of language features, we focused on the major
language features listed in Table 1. These language features were extracted from the Bash 5.0
manual [14].
Utilities.
A large number of command line utilities exist in the Unix-like systems. To make the
study feasible, we limited the scope of utilities by only considering the builtins [33] and the utilities
from the GNU coreutils package [15]. Bash builtins are innate functionalities that are implemented
inside Bash while utilities from GNU coreutils are external programs. The former one includes
57 builtin utilities, such as echo, cd and set, and the latter one consists of 102 external utilities,
including rm, mkdir and cp. There are three common utilities shared by the two groups, which
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 8/22 ────────

1:8
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
Table 1. Bash Language Features
Language Features
Examples
pipelines
|, |&
lists of commands
;, &, ||, &&
compound commands
until, while, for, if, case, select, [[...]]
grouping
subshell, { commands }
function
⟨function definition⟩
variable
⟨variable definition⟩, e.g., VAR="a string"
shell parameters
positional, special, e.g., $0, $?
expansions
brace, tilde, parameter, arithmetic, filename
redirection
>, >>, Heredoc, Here-string...
substitutions
command, process
arrays
array=(value1, value2, ...)
aliases
alias name="Hello, world!"
are echo, test and pwd. In total our study takes 156 (= 57 + 102 −3) utilities. By combining both
groups, we believe that it would cover most of the operations needed to develop Bash scripts.
Listing 1. Example of a Bash script
#!/bin/bash
cat /etc/passwd | sort
script
shebang (#!bin/bash)
pipeline (cat /etc/passwd | sort)
simple_command (cat /etc/passwd)
generic_command_directive (cat)
word (/etc/passwd)
|
generic_command_directive (sort)
Fig. 3. The Parse Tree of the Bash Script in Listing 1.
Parse Trees.
Once the scope of language features and utilities was defined, we used the IntelliJ
shell parser to generate a parse tree for each Bash script and analyzed the language feature and
utility usage extracted from the parse tree nodes. To illustrate, Listing 1 contains a simple Bash
script which prints out sorted lines from the file /etc/passwd. Figure 3 shows the parse tree for
Listing 1. As seen in the parse tree, the example Bash script is made up of a shebang, and a pipeline
joining two commands (cat with the argument /etc/passwd, and sort).
4.3
Results
4.3.1
Language Features. Figure 4 plots the usage of each of the selected Bash language features
from the general dataset and the top 1k dataset. Each bar shows the probability of a feature being
used in an arbitrary file in the corpora. The x-axis labels in Figure 4 are the language features
and they are sorted in descending order based on their popularity (i.e., the percentage of files that
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 9/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:9
variable
command substitution
if
parameter expansion
redirection
pipeline
special parameter
grouping {...}
function definition
filename expansion
positional parameter
for
[[...]]
case
command list
while
array
arithmetic expansion
subshell
tilde expansion
brace expansion
process substituion
until
select
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
File Percentage (%)
Bash Language Feature Usage
General
Top 1K
Fig. 4. The Percentage of Files Containing Each Bash Language Feature.
contains such feature) from the general dataset. The following are a few interesting observations
based on the results.
Observation 1 — Loop is less commonly used than conditional.
Conditional and loop
expressions are both fundamental building blocks that manage the control flow of a program. Based
on Figure 4, If statements have a 70%/58% file occurrence percentage in both datasets while for
loops and while loops only have less than 40% and 30% file occurrences respectively. It suggests
that Bash developers do not usually work on repetitive tasks and the Bash scripts follow a more
linear fashion with only conditional branches.
Observation 2 — Array is not commonly used in Bash scripts.
In the original Bourne shell,
arrays are not supported. In contrast, one of the additional builtin features from Bash is the support
of array. Despite being a builtin feature and supposedly a useful data structure in many other
programming languages, a quick inspection on Figure 4 suggests that array usage is relatively
minimal with around 10%/15% occurrences in the collected Bash scripts.
Observation 3 — The popularity of Bash language features are similar across the general
dataset and the top 1k dataset.
Although the x-axis labels are sorted based on popularity from
the general dataset, the language feature usage in the top 1k dataset follows a similar descending
order. To measure the differences of the language feature usage among the two datasets, we
computed the average differences in file occurrence percentage for each feature. It resulted in each
language feature having an average of only 5.6% more usage in the general dataset than the top
1k dataset. Additionally, we inspected and listed the ten most commonly used features from both
datasets in Table 2. We can observe that the top ten features are almost the same, with the exception
that the general dataset has more filename expansions while the top 1k dataset has more Bash
conditionals [[...]] of compound command.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 10/22 ────────

1:10
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
Table 2. Common Bash Language Features
Rank
General
Top 1k
1
variable
variable
2
command substitution
command substitution
3
if
if
4
parameter expansion
parameter expansion
5
redirection
redirection
6
pipeline
pipeline
7
special parameter
grouping {...}
8
grouping {...}
special parameter
9
function definition
[[...]]
10
filename expansion
function definition
While the language feature usage from the top 1k dataset follows a similar descending order, the
usage of Bash conditional [[...]] of compound command and command list are the exceptions.
They have a much similar usage in both datasets than the usage of other language features, as seen
in Figure 2.
4.3.2
Utilities. Table 3 and Table 4 show the usage of top 30 Bash builtins and GNU core utilities
from both the general and the top 1k datasets. Entries that only appear in one dataset but not the
other are highlighted in bold font.
Observation 4 —File, path and directory related utilities are more commonly used.
Ta-
ble 4 shows that the five most commonly used utilities from the GNU coreutil package in both
datasets are the same. rm deletes a file or directory; mkdir creates a directory; cat reads the content
of a file; dirname takes a path and removes the trailing "/" component in the path; cp copies a file
or a directory to a destination. All of these are utilities that manage files, path and directories.
Observation 5 — Bash utility usage is relatively similar across the general dataset and the
top 1k dataset.
In terms of Bash builtins, the differences in the top 30 popular builtins between
the two datasets are minimal. Table 3 shows that alias and let only appeared in the top 30 list
from the general dataset while type and hash only appeared in the top 30 list from the top 1k
datasets. Out of these four builtins, the highest utility usage is 3% from alias, which is much less
substantial compared to the rest of the builtin usage. Similarly, the top 30 popular GNU core utilities
from both datasets almost contain the same 30 entries, with the exception of whoami and install.
Overall, the Bash scripts in both datasets exhibit very similar usage of utilities.
Conclusions.
We ranked the most commonly used Bash features and utilities from 1,352,768
real world Bash scripts. We found that loops and arrays are not commonly used indicating that
Bash scripts follow a more linear fashion with only conditional branches. We also observe that file,
path, and directory related utilities are more common.
Suggestion to static analysis tools - Static analysis tools should support top language
features, builtins and GNU core utilities. Both NL2Bash [26] and Bash2py [10] neglected to
analyze redirection even though this Bash feature was used in over 60% of the Bash scripts in our
general dataset. In addition, while Bash2py translates many of the Bash builtin commands to their
Python equivalents, most of the GNU core utilities were neglected. Translating commonly used
GNU core utilities may help with readability and thus maintainability of the converted code.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 11/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:11
Table 3. Top 30 Bash Builtin Usage
General
Top 1k
builtin
file(%)
builtin
file(%)
1
echo
77.7
echo
54.8
2
[
55.9
[
37.2
3
exit
52.7
exit
33.3
4
cd
38.1
set
28.8
5
set
25.5
cd
20.2
6
pwd
23.2
source
19.5
7
export
21.1
export
14.1
8
source
18.1
local
13.1
9
shift
14.8
.
11.0
10
read
13.7
pwd
8.9
11
local
12.2
return
8.7
12
.
11.8
shift
7.6
13
return
11.6
printf
7.2
14
printf
10.2
read
7.1
15
eval
9.2
exec
5.0
16
break
7.8
break
4.3
17
test
7.4
eval
4.2
18
exec
6.8
declare
4.2
19
unset
6.5
trap
3.7
20
trap
5.7
unset
3.3
21
declare
4.4
command
2.8
22
pushd
4.4
continue
2.7
23
getopts
4.2
test
2.5
24
popd
4.2
pushd
2.3
25
continue
4.0
popd
2.1
26
alias
3.2
kill
1.7
27
kill
2.9
hash
1.6
28
let
2.7
type
1.6
29
command
2.5
getopts
1.5
30
wait
2.5
wait
1.3
Table 4. Top 30 GNU Core Utility Usage
General
Top 1k
utility
file(%)
utility
file(%)
1
rm
33.1
cat
19.8
2
mkdir
30.1
mkdir
18.6
3
cat
28.7
rm
17.7
4
dirname
23.2
dirname
16.6
5
cp
23.0
cp
9.4
6
date
16.6
true
7.5
7
sleep
12.0
cut
7.5
8
mv
11.9
basename
7.2
9
basename
11.6
chmod
7.0
10
ls
11.5
sleep
6.9
11
cut
10.3
head
4.6
12
chmod
9.9
sort
4.4
13
tr
9.1
mv
4.4
14
true
7.4
tr
4.3
15
touch
6.6
touch
4.2
16
head
6.6
date
4.0
17
wc
6.4
mktemp
3.9
18
ln
6.0
uname
3.9
19
uname
5.5
ln
3.8
20
tee
5.4
chown
3.6
21
sort
5.4
readlink
3.4
22
tail
5.0
wc
3.2
23
readlink
4.6
ls
2.9
24
mktemp
3.2
tail
2.7
25
chown
2.9
id
1.8
26
hostname
2.7
tee
1.7
27
seq
2.5
seq
1.6
28
id
2.5
hostname
1.2
29
whoami
1.5
uniq
0.9
30
uniq
1.5
install
0.6
5
RQ2: HOW FREQUENTLY DO CODE SMELLS OCCUR IN BASH SCRIPTS? WHAT
ARE THE COMMON CODE SMELLS?
5.1
Motivation
As mentioned in Section 1, there exist studies such as Bash2Py [10], NL2Bash [26] and NLC2CMD [2]
(English to Bash) that attempt to convert Bash scripts to Python scripts or convert commands
described in natural languages to Bash commands. One of the practicalities of these studies is that
it avoids the overhead of developing and maintaining Bash scripts due to its less intuitive syntax
and semantics. We want to investigate and gain insights into the general quality of Bash scripts in
reality and whether or not having syntactic or semantic issues is a common characteristic of Bash
scripts.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 12/22 ────────

1:12
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
5.2
Approach
To answer the question, we used ShellCheck reports as the measurement of script quality. ShellCheck
is an open-source, state-of-the-practice static analysis tool that can catch many syntactic and
semantic issues hidden in shell scripts. Given a shell script, it generates a report for each detected
issue. For each report, it comes with a severity rating, the location of the issue and an explanation
message. The severity rating is classified into four categories: error, warning, info, style. Style related
reports are considered free of mistakes as we do not care about stylistic improvement in this study.
The following is a short example of a generated ShellCheck report for Listing 1b:
Listing 2. ShellCheck Report for Listing 1b
[{
"file":"...",
"line":3,
"endLine":3,
"column":6,"endColumn":6,
"level":"info",
"code":2086 ,
"message":"Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting."
}]
One problem we found in using ShellCheck was that the severity rating is not clearly defined
among error, warning and info, and there is no available information from its official documentation
as far as we are concerned. To mitigate this issue, we applied ShellCheck to each script and treated
all reports regarding error, warning and info as potential code smells. Overall, we ran ShellCheck
on the most recent commit snapshot of each collected Bash script. Analysis on the ShellCheck
reports was conducted to identify the distribution of report severity and common issues reported.
5.3
Results
Prevalence of code smells. The distribution of report severity from both the general and the top
1k dataset is listed in Table 6. There are two groups of severity rating that are considered. The first
group counts the percentage of Bash scripts that have at least one of error, warning and info reports;
the second group counts the percentage of issue-free Bash scripts that only has style reports or
empty reports.
Observation 6 — Code smells are prevalent in Bash scripts and are more prevalent in the
general dataset than in the top 1k dataset.
As Table 6 demonstrates, the overall data suggests
that code smells are prevalent in Bash scripts. More specifically, only 19.1% of Bash scripts in the
general dataset have only style or no ShellCheck reports. The data suggest that code smells or
potential bugs are quite common in the general population of Bash scripts. In contrast, 46.5% of
Bash scripts that are from the top 1k dataset are free from any error, warning or info reports. The
results are to be expected because they are more likely to be maintained by multiple developers and
potentially have gone through many reviews or static analysis such as ShellCheck before getting
committed to their Github repositories.
Themes of code smells.
Table 6 shows that it is quite common for Bash scripts to have code
smells or mistakes that go unrecognized, even if the script is popular and potentially well maintained
by multiple developers. In order to understand the details, we pooled together all reports of error,
warning and info severity and showed the five most common reports from our Bash script corpora
as shown in Table 5. We further categorized and labeled each distinct report to find common
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 13/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:13
characteristics among them. The bold entries in the tables indicate that they appear in both the
general and the top 1k datasets.
Observation 7 — Quoting, word splitting, error handling, array and return value are the
common themes of code smells.
Table 5 shows that the top 5 ShellCheck reports of the two
datasets are similar. Four out of five types of reports are the same. By looking at the bold entries of
the table, we can see that the common code smells revolve around the categories of quoting, word
splitting, array, error handling and return value.
Table 5. Top 5 ShellCheck Reports
(a) Top 5 ShellCheck Reports from the General Dataset
Code
Category
Files(%)
Message
SC2164
Error handling
21.5%
Use cd ... || exit in case cd fails.
SC2046
Quoting, Splitting
20.9%
Quote this to prevent word splitting.
SC2162
Command option
12%
read without -r will mangle backslashes.
SC2155
Return value
8.7%
Declare and assign separately to avoid masking return values.
SC2068
Quoting, Splitting, Array
6%
Double quote array expansions to avoid re-splitting elements
(b) Top 5 ShellCheck Reports from the Top 1k Dataset
Code
Category
Files(%)
Message
SC2046
Quoting, Splitting
9.5%
Quote this to prevent word splitting.
SC2164
Error handling
8.1%
Use cd ... || exit in case cd fails.
SC2155
Return value
5.3%
Declare and assign separately to avoid masking return values.
SC2128
Array, Expansion
3.2%
Expanding an array without an index only gives the first element.
SC2068
Quoting, Splitting, Array
2.6%
Double quote array expansions to avoid re-splitting elements.
Correlation between the size of Bash script size and number of code smells. Figure 5 is
a plot that visualizes the correlation between the size of Bash script and the average number of
code smells (i.e. ShellCheck reports) per script size. The x-axis is the size of Bash script in byte and
the y-axis is the corresponding average number of code smells. Due to the large size of data points,
we applied hexagon binning [6] to show the correlation as well as the density.
Observation 8 — The size of Bash script and the number of code smells have a moderately
positive correlation..
As shown in Figure 5, the number of code smells slowly increases as the
script size gets larger. To quantify the correlation, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient
between the two variables using the following formula:
𝑝𝑋,𝑌= Cov(𝑋,𝑌)
𝜎𝑋𝜎𝑌
(1)
Table 6. Percentage of Bash Scripts with ShellCheck Reports
Severity Rating
General
Top 1k
Error/Warning/Info
1,071,330 (80.9%)
7,707 (53.5%)
Style/None
252,934 (19.1%)
6,699 (46.5%)
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 14/22 ────────

1:14
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Bash Script Size (byte)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Average Number of ShellCheck Reports
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Density
Fig. 5. Correlation between the Size of Bash Scripts and the Average Number of Code Smells. The brighter
parts represent higher density for the number of code smells at a certain script size. A moderate positive
correlation can be seen from the lighter area extending upward as the Bash script size increases.
𝐶𝑜𝑣(𝑋,𝑌) is the covariance between X and Y, and 𝜎𝑋and 𝜎𝑌are the standard deviation of X and Y
respectively. The calculation resulted in a correlation coefficient value of 0.38, which indicates a
moderately positive correlation between script sizes and the number of code smells.
Conclusions.
Bash is particularly prone to code smells for development, even among top Bash
repositories as observed using ShellCheck. We found that although feature usage is similar between
general and top 1k dataset, the general dataset contains more code smells.
Suggestion to Bash practitioners - Practice defensive programming by checking exit
status of commands and using quotes where appropriate. Developers should try to reduce
code smells by explicitly checking the exit status after each command to ensure correct execution as
Bash lacks error handling constructs found in so many mainstream languages (e.g. C++, Java, Lisp,
Python). Quotes ensure that word splitting would not occur unexpectedly causing one argument to
split into multiple. We gave one such example in Figure 1.
Even so, Bash will remain error-prone as common sources for bugs such as quoting and splitting,
are also features used by developers. More sophisticated tools need to be proposed in order to find
Bash bugs rather than relying on hard coded heuristics. We investigate real world Bash bugs in the
following research question.
6
RQ3: WHAT ARE THE MOST COMMON BUGS THAT ARISE IN BASH SCRIPTS AS
THEY EVOLVE?
6.1
Motivation
The results from RQ2 give us a general picture of common mistakes in Bash scripts that are hidden
and overlooked. However, they do not include bugs that were found and fixed during the script
development. To further understand the characteristics of real-world bugs in Bash scripts, it would
be useful to look into the evolution of Bash scripts and identify common bugs which the developers
were aware of and efforts were spent into fixing. In doing so, we will have a more holistic view of
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 15/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:15
bugs found in Bash scripts and evaluate whether common bugfixes can be feasibly captured using
static analysis tools such as ShellCheck.
6.2
Approach
To investigate the common bugs that manifest in the evolution of Bash scripts and identify their
characteristics, we randomly sampled bug-fixing commits and manually inspected each of the
samples. In total, we studied 200 random bug-fixing commit samples.
Data Collection and Sampling.
To identify bug-fixing commits, a keyword heuristic was used
on commit messages, similar to the method used in other bug studies [3, 11, 22, 28, 31]. We filtered
and identified any commit message that contains any of the following bug-fixing related keywords:
error, bug, fix, issue, mistake, incorrect, fault, defect, flaw, bugfix.
A total of 200 bug-fixing commits were randomly sampled. We settled on 200 because the number
was similar to existing bug categorization studies [3, 11, 22, 28, 31] to reflect the types of real world
bugs in Bash projects. Among the 200 commits, the first 100 ones were randomly sampled from the
top five Bash projects based on their commit history where twenty commits were randomly sampled
from each project. Table 7 shows all the selected projects, all of which are active in development
and have a reasonable amount of stars, contributors and development history. RVM4 is a command
line tool for managing Ruby application environment; devstack5 is a set of scripts that facilitates
the deployment of OpenStack cloud; RetroPie-Setup6 is a collection of shell scripts that help set up
Ubuntu on Raspberry Pi and PC; dokku7 is a tool to manage the lifecycle of applications; LinuxGSM8
is a command line tool that facilitates the management of game servers. The rest 100 bug-fixing
commits were randomly sampled from the general dataset in which there is no overlap with the
previously selected samples.
Table 7. Sampled Bash Github Projects
Projects
Commits
Stars
Contributors
Development History
RVM
11,530
4.5k
556
12 years
devstack
10,050
1.8k
640
10 years
RetroPie-Setup
6,752
9k
146
9 years
Dokku
6,529
20.7k
401
8 years
LinuxGSM
5,787
2.6k
144
8 years
We adopted such sampling scheme in hopes of achieving a good balance between feasibility and
generalization of the this manual inspection campaign.
Manual Inspection.
To manually inspect each bug-fixing commit, three authors who were
proficient at programming in Bash were asked to do the following tasks:
• Identify and categorize the bug(s)
• Identify how the relevant bug(s) was fixed
• Check whether it can be caught by ShellCheck if possible
4https://github.com/rvm/rvm
5https://github.com/openstack/devstack
6https://github.com/RetroPie/RetroPie-Setups
7https://github.com/dokku/dokku
8https://github.com/GameServerManagers/LinuxGSM
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 16/22 ────────

1:16
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
The inspectors individually reviewed twenty bug fixing commits per week. Their responses to
the above questions were recorded for each bug. After each week, the responses were collected and
each bug was discussed. All conflicts were resolved during the discussion to ensure consistency
and quality. Eventually we reached a consensus on the above three questions for each bug.
Bug Categories.
We predefined four bug categories of interest for inspection. In the end, all
manually inspected bugs fitted into one of these predefined four categories.
6.2.1
Bash syntactic bug. Any bug that is caused by misuse of syntax is considered a syntactic
bug. They are often caused by white space, indentation, newline, parentheses, etc.. Listing 3 below
shows an example of Bash syntactic bug.
Listing 3. Example of Bash syntactic bug
#!/bin/bash
x="this is a sentence."
--if [[ "$x" = "..."]]; # BUG: missing the white space near the closing bracket
++if [[ "$x" = "..." ]];
then
# do something here
fi
6.2.2
Bash semantic bug. Bash semantic bugs are the bugs related to the misuse of Bash features
and utilities. They are the focus of this inspection. Listing 4 below shows an example of Bash
semantic bug.
Listing 4. Example of Bash semantic bug
#!/bin/bash
--rm /some_folder # BUG: missing option -r when working with folder
++rm -r /some_folder
6.2.3
Application semantic bug. Application semantic bugs are primarily related to bugs caused by
application logic. Most application bugs are domain-specific but we tried to gain more insights by
further providing a few sub-categories such as resource cleaning, file/path/directory management
and portability. Any application semantic bug that does not fit into any sub-categories is given the
generic sub-category. Listing 5 below shows an example of Application semantic bug.
Listing 5. Example of Application semantic bug
#!/bin/bash
--if [[ cmd1 && cmd2 && cmd3 ]]; # BUG: changes are due to application logic
++if [[ cmd1 || cmd2 || cmd3 ]];
then
# do something here
fi
6.2.4
False positive. Lastly, the false positive category denotes the commit is not at all related to
any bug-fixing activities (e.g. version update) or the bugs themselves are not in Bash scripts.
Thematic Analysis.
We used open card sorting [36] to group the common causes of Bash
semantic bugs identified during manual inspection. During the sort, each bug was added to either
an existing group or into a new group based on its cause. The groups were split and joined during
the card sort as we saw fit. We originally planned to analyze common themes from application
semantic bugs as well. However, it turned out that the majority of application semantic bugs were
generic and domain specific. We summarized our results in the following section.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 17/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:17
6.3
Results
By inspecting 200 randomly sampled bug-fixing commits, we were able to identify 57 Bash semantic
bugs, 122 application semantic bugs, 3 Bash syntactic bugs and 32 false positives. Although atomic
commits are considered good practices in general, certain commits included multiple bugfixes and
we ended up inspecting more than 200 changes. The per group distribution is shown in Table 8.
Furthermore, all the disagreements were settled easily. Overall, we were able to identify several
common themes in Bash semantics bugs in our samples.
Table 8. Bugfix Category Distribution
Bash Semantics
Application Semantics
Bash Syntax
False Positive
Total
General
22
61
2
21
106
Projects
35
61
1
11
108
Total
57
122
3
32
214
Bash Bug Themes.
One of the objectives in the study is to identify common Bash bugs. A quick
inspection of Table 8 tells us that only two bug fixes were related to syntax and seemingly it is
rare to have bugs only caused by syntax issues. In contrast, Bash semantic bugs are much more
prevalent based on our inspection results. In the 57 Bash semantic bugs, the following are the
common themes discovered in their root cause:
6.3.1
Quoting (9/57 = 15.7%). As suggested by the collected ShellCheck reports in Section 5.3
that quoting is one of the major themes of code smells and potential causes of bugs, the results
from the manual inspection also corroborate the findings from RQ2. A closer look at the inspected
bug-fixing samples reveals that Bash developers were having quoting issues with expansions where
globbing and word splitting would be performed without quoting, or mixing up single quotes
with double quotes. Based on our bug-fixing samples, the former issue could be mostly caught
by ShellCheck’s extensive quoting checks where double quoting expansions is assumed to be the
convention. However, ShellCheck was less effective against the latter issue in our samples. The
latter issue seems not as common as the former one and thus it is harder to assume developer’s
intention.
6.3.2
File, Path and Directory Management (8/57 = 14.0%). Files, paths and directories are resources
that developers frequently interact with and manage in their Bash scripts. Based on the inspected
bug-fixing samples, it is another common theme of bug fixes during Bash script development. More
specifically, most resource bugs revolve around the lack of existence checking of resources. It seems
to be the case that developers often assume the existence of certain static resources in their Bash
scripts and the assumption does not always hold in all environments. As far as we are concerned,
ShellCheck does not check the existence of resources and it is not able to detect such type of bugs.
Suggestion to Bash practitioners - Adding checks to the existence of static resources
can be helpful. Although it is possible that resources are created dynamically in Bash scripts,
there are still many usage of statically specified resources. Adding checks to the existence of static
resources can help reduce some of the resource management bugs, in which their existences are
wrongly assumed.
6.3.3
Command Options (6/57 = 10.5%). Commands are the core of Bash scripts as they provide
the means for developers to interact with the operating systems. As part of the commands, options
are essential in specifying the desired behaviors. Based on our inspected bug-fixing samples,
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 18/22 ────────

1:18
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
command option is also a common source of bugs. These bugs are mostly related to a○the usage of
invalid options, b○the improper usage of options. As far as we are concerned, ShellCheck currently
is only able to catch very few command option bugs. The improper usage of options often depends
on user intention and it is unlikely that static analysis will be able to catch such bugs. However,
the usage of invalid options of common utilities can be feasibly caught with static analysis.
Suggestion to static analysis tools - Static analysis tools can incorporate command op-
tion checking to reduce the usage of invalid flags. Table 3 and Table 4 include the popular
builtins and GNU core utilities found in the collected Bash scripts. Static analysis can make use of
mandb9 that contains the information of system command options, or creates its command option
database to check invalid option usage for common commands.
6.3.4
Permission (6/57 = 10.5%). Permission plays an important role in the Unix-like systems.
Certain commands and resources can only be used when the users are given the sudo/root privilege.
Based on the inspected samples, they did not have sudo/root privilege by default and the permission
bugs we identified revolve around missing command permission and unexpected change of resource
permissions. ShellCheck currently is not able to catch permission bugs.
6.3.5
Error Handling (6/57 = 10.5%). In Section 5.3, one of the major themes in the collected
ShellCheck reports is error handling and our inspection on the bug-fixing samples align well with
the previous finding. Several bugs were identified to have chains of commands and developers
assumed the success of each command. The general fixes we observed are either adding || true to
each command (i.e. cmd1 || true) so that command failure would not exit the script, or putting
&& in between each command (i.e.
cmd1 && cmd2 && ... && cmdn) so that the subsequent
commands are run only if the previous commands have succeeded. To some degree, ShellCheck
warns user about potential command failure for certain commands such as cd. However, it is
command specific and limited in general.
7
RELATED WORK
As of the time of writing this paper, we are not aware of any large-scale empirical studies in
Bash usage similar to ours. There are a few studies and open-source tooling that revolve around
debugging and testing Bash scripts. Mazurak et al. [30] developed a static analyzer ABASH to
identify common security vulnerabilities in Bash scripts. Our work complements this by identifying
error-prone aspects of bash. D’Antoni et al. [9] focused on the usability of command-line and
developed a rule-based tooling called NoFAQ to automatically correct problematic commands.
Similar to Mazurak [30], Holen [21] developed a pattern-based shell linter called ShellCheck in
Haskell that catches popular syntax and semantic issues in Bash scripts and it has gained its
popularity over time. There is also another open-source tooling named BAT (Bash Automated
Testing)10 that facilitates the testing of Bash scripts. Our work can facilitate development of tools
like these to better target real-world problems Bash practitioners face such as permissions and
error handing.
Besides Bash tooling and studies, there have been studies that focus on the language feature
usage in other programming languages. Dyer et al. [12] generated the abstract syntax trees (AST)
over 31,000 Java projects and empirically analyzed their language feature usage. Similarly, Läm-
mel et al. [24] also employed an AST-based approach and empirically studied the API footprint
and coverage in open-source Java repositories. Collberg et al. [8] conducted a large-scale static
analysis of Java bytecode from 1,132 java jar-file and collected various metrics regarding the Java
9https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/mandb.8.html
10https://github.com/sstephenson/bats
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 19/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:19
feature usage. In addition to Java, Hills et al. [20] studied PHP language features using 19 large
open-source repositories with the focus on dynamic language feature. Out of 109 PHP language
features, they identified that 80% of files only use 74 language features. Similar to these studies,
our work aim to understand the fundamental usage of the shell language. Compared to them, our
study is the first one focusing on Bash language. Our observation noted that there is very little
array usage, yet file, path, and directory related commands are very frequently used.
There are a few empirical studies that examined the bugs in different programming languages
and the bugs in real-world projects. For examples, previous study analyzed the bugs found in
other programming languages such as Rust [31], C and C++ [4]. The same effort in probabilistic
language systems led to developments of better fuzzing techniques [11]. Besides, popular projects
such as the Linux kernel [7], file systems [27], compilers [32], deep learning systems [34] and
others [19, 22, 35], enjoyed attention from researchers providing characterization of bug fixes. Our
work falls in this research direction. We focus on Bash script, whose features and bug patterns have
not been empirically studied in large scale. We aim to draw researcher attention to Bash language
and address the common issues faced by software engineers.
8
THREATS TO VALIDITY
8.1
Internal
8.1.1
Static analysis tool. In this study, we leveraged the static analysis tool to measure the code
quality of Bash scripts. Therefore, the performance of the static analysis tool could affect our results.
To mitigate this threat, we selected ShellCheck, which is one of the most popular open-source
static analysis tools for shell languages (22,000+ stars in Github). It has a long development history
(from 2012) and is active in development. It is also integrated in some commercial IDE product (e.g.
IntelliJ Idea). We believe it is a reliable ground truth for Bash script measurement. On the other
hand, there is no other good static analysis tools for Bash, a fact which our paper aims to bring to
the attention of our software engineering and programming language research community.
8.1.2
Bash script analysis. Although we have collected a good amount of Bash scripts, there could
be certain scripts that were automatically generated and followed certain templates or patterns. A
large amount of auto-generated Bash scripts could skew and affect the analysis of language feature
and utility usage. During our manual inspection, we did not find any auto-generated Bash scripts
and we believe the chance of having many auto-generated Bash scripts in our collected samples is
minimal.
Additionally, the collected Bash scripts could have gone through ShellCheck and the code smells
or bugs could have been fixed, ignored or silenced. Based on the data, we believe that such scenario
is not common and it would have minimal impact on our analysis.
Lastly, we conducted a manual inspection in our study. To address the threats in manual inspection
(e.g. bias), all inspectors are familiar with Bash and all inspection results were cross-referenced to
minimize human error.
8.2
External
8.2.1
Data collection. In our study, we collected over one million Bash scripts in hopes of having a
more representative study. However, all of our samples came from the same platform Github. Any
close-source and proprietary Bash scripts were not included in this study, limiting the generalization
of the study to some extent. Additionally, we collected our Bash scripts in chunks using the Github
API. Due to its limitations, we could only collect 1,000 files per byte range for the general dataset
and we do not know the actual file size distribution of Bash scripts in the real world. To alleviate
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 20/22 ────────

1:20
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
the threat, we collected a broad spectrum of Bash scripts whose file sizes range from 1 to 50,000
bytes.
Our top 1K dataset on the other hand did not suffer from this issue as none of the repositories had
over 1,000 Bash files. The results from the potentially biased general dataset and the top 1K dataset
in RQ1 and RQ2 were similar, thus this bias may not be a significant source of error. Furthermore,
our manual analysis for RQ3 was conducted using the top 1K dataset and does not suffer from the
same bias as we are able to collect all the Bash scripts in those repositories.
9
CONCLUSIONS
The Bourne-again shell, commonly known as Bash, is one of the mainstream shells available in
many Unix-like systems. In this paper, we presented the first large-scale empirical study on Bash
language usage.
By statically analyzing over one million Bash scripts in Github, we identified the commonly used
Bash language features and utilities in the general and popular Bash scripts, showing that both
groups share very similar usage. We then studied the occurrences of code smells in Bash scripts
with ShellCheck, showing that Bash script is quite error-prone and there could be many issues that
go unrecognized. Only 20% of general Bash scripts in our samples are free of code smells while 50%
of popular Bash scripts in our samples are free of code smells. We also looked into the common
themes of code smells, showing that quoting, word splitting, error handling, array and return value
are some of the common themes of code smells. Further, we showed that there is a moderately
positive correlation between the size of Bash script and the number of code smells found in Bash
scripts. Lastly we conducted a manual inspection on randomly sampled bug-fixing commits of Bash
scripts. We discovered several common themes of bugs during the evolution Bash scripts, most of
which concern quoting, resource management, command option, permission and error handling.
With this empirical study, we believe that our results can be utilized to help Bash practitioners
focus on learning the common language features and utilities while paying more attention to
common code smells and bugs. Although the shell has decades of history and is one of the ten
most popular programming languages in Github, our study found Bash scripts to be generally
error-prone. We recommend Bash practitioners to program defensively by checking command exit
statuses and by quoting variables to prevent unintended word splitting. Further, we suggest Bash
practitioners to add checks for the existence of static resources in order to reduce the bugginess of
their Bash scripts.
Results show that current static analysis tools are insufficient at analyzing real world Bash scripts
and finding Bash bugs. We hope that the Bash usage insights will guide future tools on supporting
popular Bash features and utilities. We recommend developers for static analysis tools to address
detecting common Bash bugs such as invalid flags. We envision that the insights from our empirical
results will be helpful for future research in the improvement of shell scripting, command-line
productivity and reliability.
To ensure reproducibility and facilitate future research on Bash scripts, we have made both our
collected data set and analysis scripts publicly available at
http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5732299 [25]
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank all the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. This work was
funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through the
Discovery Grant.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 21/22 ────────

Bash in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs
1:21
REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. Advanced Bash-Scripting Guide. https://web.archive.org/web/20210602215627/https://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/
internalvariables.html
[2] Mayank Agarwal, Jorge J. Barroso, Tathagata Chakraborti, Eli M. Dow, Kshitij Fadnis, Borja Godoy, Madhavan Pallan,
and Kartik Talamadupula. 2020. Project CLAI: Instrumenting the Command Line as a New Environment for AI Agents.
arXiv:2002.00762 [cs.HC]
[3] Ray Baishakhi, Posnett Daryl, Devanbu Premkumar, and Filkov Vladimir. 2017. A Large-Scale Study of Programming
Languages and Code Quality in GitHub. Commun. ACM 60, 10 (Sept. 2017), 91–100. https://doi.org/10.1145/3126905
[4] Pamela Bhattacharya and Iulian Neamtiu. 2011. Assessing programming language impact on development and
maintenance: a study on c and c++. In 2011 33rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 171–180.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1985793.1985817
[5] Stephen R Bourne. 1978. An introduction to the UNIX shell. Bell Laboratories. Computing Science.
[6] Daniel B Carr, Richard J Littlefield, WL Nicholson, and JS Littlefield. 1987. Scatterplot matrix techniques for large N. J.
Amer. Statist. Assoc. 82, 398 (1987), 424–436.
[7] Andy Chou, Junfeng Yang, Benjamin Chelf, Seth Hallem, and Dawson Engler. 2001. An Empirical Study of Operating
Systems Errors. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (Banff, Alberta, Canada)
(SOSP ’01). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 73–88. https://doi.org/10.1145/502034.502042
[8] Christian Collberg, Ginger Myles, and Michael Stepp. 2007.
An empirical study of Java bytecode
programs.
Software: Practice and Experience 37, 6 (2007), 581–641.
https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.776
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/spe.776
[9] Loris D’Antoni, Rishabh Singh, and Michael Vaughn. 2017. NoFAQ: Synthesizing Command Repairs from Examples. In
Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering (Paderborn, Germany) (ESEC/FSE
2017). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 582–592. https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106241
[10] Ian J. Davis, Mike Wexler, Cheng Zhang, Richard. C. Holt, and Theresa Weber. 2015. Bash2py: A bash to Python
translator. In 2015 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER).
508–511. https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER.2015.7081866
[11] Saikat Dutta, Owolabi Legunsen, Zixin Huang, and Sasa Misailovic. 2018. Testing Probabilistic Programming Systems.
In Proceedings of the 2018 26th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on
the Foundations of Software Engineering (Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA) (ESEC/FSE 2018). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 574–586. https://doi.org/10.1145/3236024.3236057
[12] Robert Dyer, Hridesh Rajan, Hoan Anh Nguyen, and Tien N. Nguyen. 2014. Mining Billions of AST Nodes to Study
Actual and Potential Usage of Java Language Features. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software
Engineering (Hyderabad, India) (ICSE 2014). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 779–790.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568295
[13] Free Software Foundation. 2020. Bash. Retrieved Feb 2, 2021 from https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/
[14] Free Software Foundation. 2020. GNU Bash manual. Retrieved Feb 15, 2021 from https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/
manual/
[15] Free Software Foundation. 2020. GNU core utilities.
Retrieved Feb 15, 2021 from https://www.gnu.org/software/
coreutils/
[16] Github. 2020. The 2020 state of the octoverse. Retrieved Feb 2, 2021 from https://octoverse.github.com/
[17] Michael Greenberg and Austin J. Blatt. 2019. Executable Formal Semantics for the POSIX Shell. Proc. ACM Program.
Lang. 4, POPL, Article 43 (Dec. 2019), 30 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3371111
[18] Greg. 2021. Bash Pitfalls. Retrieved Feb 23, 2021 from https://mywiki.wooledge.org/BashPitfalls/
[19] Rui Gu, Guoliang Jin, Linhai Song, Linjie Zhu, and Shan Lu. 2015. What Change History Tells Us about Thread
Synchronization. In Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering (Bergamo, Italy)
(ESEC/FSE 2015). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 426–438. https://doi.org/10.1145/2786805.
2786815
[20] Mark Hills, Paul Klint, and Jurgen Vinju. 2013. An Empirical Study of PHP Feature Usage: A Static Analysis Perspective.
In Proceedings of the 2013 International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Lugano, Switzerland) (ISSTA 2013).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 325–335. https://doi.org/10.1145/2483760.2483786
[21] Vidar Holen. 2021. ShellCheck. Retrieved Feb 2, 2021 from https://www.shellcheck.net/
[22] Guoliang Jin, Linhai Song, Xiaoming Shi, Joel Scherpelz, and Shan Lu. 2012. Understanding and Detecting Real-
World Performance Bugs. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation (Beijing, China) (PLDI ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 77–88.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2254064.2254075
[23] M. Jones. 2011. Evolution of shells in Linux. https://web.archive.org/web/20210411144653/https://developer.ibm.com/
technologies/linux/tutorials/l-linux-shells/. Accessed: 2021-04-11.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.


──────── page 22/22 ────────

1:22
Yiwen Dong, Zheyang Li, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan
[24] Ralf Lämmel, Ekaterina Pek, and Jürgen Starek. 2011. Large-Scale, AST-Based API-Usage Analysis of Open-Source Java
Projects. In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (TaiChung, Taiwan) (SAC ’11). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1317–1324. https://doi.org/10.1145/1982185.1982471
[25] Zheyang Li, Yiwen Dong, Yongqiang Tian, Chengnian Sun, Michael W. Godfrey, and Meiyappan Nagappan. 2022. Bash
in the Wild: Language Usage, Code Smells, and Bugs. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5732299
[26] Xi Victoria Lin, Chenglong Wang, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Michael D. Ernst. 2018. NL2Bash: A corpus and semantic
parser for natural language interface to the Linux operating system. In LREC: Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference. Miyazaki, Japan.
[27] Lanyue Lu, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau, and Shan Lu. 2014. A Study of Linux File System
Evolution. ACM Trans. Storage 10, 1, Article 3 (Jan. 2014), 32 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2560012
[28] Shan Lu, Soyeon Park, Eunsoo Seo, and Yuanyuan Zhou. 2008. Learning from Mistakes: A Comprehensive Study on
Real World Concurrency Bug Characteristics. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Seattle, WA, USA) (ASPLOS XIII). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 329–339. https://doi.org/10.1145/1346281.1346323
[29] John R. Mashey. 1976. Using a Command Language as a High-Level Programming Language. In Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Software Engineering (San Francisco, California, USA) (ICSE ’76). IEEE Computer Society
Press, Washington, DC, USA, 169–176.
[30] Karl Mazurak and Steve Zdancewic. 2007. ABASH: Finding Bugs in Bash Scripts. In Proceedings of the 2007 Workshop on
Programming Languages and Analysis for Security (San Diego, California, USA) (PLAS ’07). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 105–114. https://doi.org/10.1145/1255329.1255347
[31] Boqin Qin, Yilun Chen, Zeming Yu, Linhai Song, and Yiying Zhang. 2020. Understanding Memory and Thread Safety
Practices and Issues in Real-World Rust Programs. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (London, UK) (PLDI 2020). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 763–779. https://doi.org/10.1145/3385412.3386036
[32] Chengnian Sun, Vu Le, Qirun Zhang, and Zhendong Su. 2016. Toward Understanding Compiler Bugs in GCC and LLVM.
In Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Saarbrücken, Germany) (ISSTA
2016). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 294–305. https://doi.org/10.1145/2931037.2931074
[33] Ubuntu. 2019. bash-builtins. Retrieved Feb 15, 2021 from http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/bionic/man7/bash-
builtins.7.html
[34] Yuhao Zhang, Yifan Chen, Shing-Chi Cheung, Yingfei Xiong, and Lu Zhang. 2018. An Empirical Study on TensorFlow
Program Bugs. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(Amsterdam, Netherlands) (ISSTA 2018). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 129–140. https://doi.org/10.1145/3213846.3213866
[35] Hao Zhong and Zhendong Su. 2015. An Empirical Study on Real Bug Fixes. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International
Conference on Software Engineering, Vol. 1. 913–923. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2015.101
[36] Thomas Zimmermann. 2016. Card-sorting: From text to themes. In Perspectives on data science for software engineering.
Elsevier, 137–141.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.
