

──────── page 1/11 ────────

On Fast Large-Scale Program Analysis in Datalog
Bernhard Scholz
Oracle Labs, Australia
bernhard.scholz@sydney.edu.au
Herbert Jordan
Oracle Labs, Australia
herbert@dps.uibk.ac.at
Pavle Suboti´c
University College London, UK
pavle.subotic@ucl.ac.uk
Till Westmann
Oracle Labs, USA
till@westmann.org
Abstract
Designing and crafting a static program analysis is challenging
due to the complexity of the task at hand. Among the challenges
are modelling the semantics of the input language, ﬁnding suitable
abstractions for the analysis, and handwriting efﬁcient code for the
analysis in a traditional imperative language such as C++. Hence,
the development of static program analysis tools is costly in terms
of development time and resources for real world languages. To
overcome, or at least alleviate the costs of developing a static
program analysis, Datalog has been proposed as a domain speciﬁc
language (DSL). With Datalog, a designer expresses a static program
analysis in the form of a logical speciﬁcation. While a domain
speciﬁc language approach aids in the ease of development of
program analyses, it is commonly accepted that such an approach
has worse runtime performance than handcrafted static analysis
tools.
In this work, we introduce a new program synthesis methodology
for Datalog speciﬁcations to produce highly efﬁcient monolithic C++
analyzers. The synthesis technique requires the re-interpretation of
the semi-naïve evaluation as a scaffolding for translation using
partial evaluation. To achieve high-performance, we employ staged-
compilation techniques and specialize the underlying relational data
structures for a given Datalog speciﬁcation. Experimentation on
benchmarks for large-scale program analysis validates the superior
performance of our approach over available Datalog tools and
demonstrates our competitiveness with state-of-the-art handcrafted
tools.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
F.3.1 [Logics and Meaning
of Programs]: Specifying, Verifying and Reasoning about Programs;
H.2.4 [Information Systems]: Systems–Query processing, Rule-
based databases; D.3.4 [Programming Languages]: Processors–
compilers
General Terms
Languages, Performance
Keywords
Static Program Analysis, Datalog, Program Synthesis,
Compiler
1.
Introduction
Program analyses are difﬁcult to design and implement for real-
world programming languages. The challenges range from faithfully
modelling the semantics of the input programs, to ﬁnding sufﬁciently
precise abstractions, to crafting a static program analysis resulting
in thousands of lines of code in a traditional programming language.
To overcome or at least alleviate the challenges in program analysis,
Datalog [2–4, 8, 10, 25, 29, 34, 36, 37] has been employed as a
domain speciﬁc language (DSL). Program analyses can be expressed
concisely in Datalog reducing the complexity and making the
program analyses uniform such that they become interoperable
with each other. Note that Datalog has received renewed interest
in various computer science communities beside static program
analysis, including information extraction, networking, security, and
cloud computing as a DSL and a rapid-prototyping tool [15].
Datalog bridges the gap between speciﬁcation and implementa-
tion, i.e., a programmer speciﬁes a problem declaratively rather than
describing it step-by-step, imperatively. A Datalog engine executes
the speciﬁcation for a set of input relations (also known as the exten-
sional database) and produces an output relation for a query. There is
a cornucopia of Datalog engines available. The most recent Datalog
engines used in program analysis are bddbddb, µZ, and LogicBlox.
The aforementioned engines use fast/compressed data structures and
have pushed the boundaries of what previous logic-based analysis
could achieve [10, 29].
Despite these advances, the vast majority of the state-of-the-
art analysis tools including points-to analysis [11] are developed
manually, requiring typically thousands of lines of code. This is
mainly due to program analyses speciﬁed in a declarative fashion
still do not scale well for large-scale input programs with millions
of program variables. Consequently, the question arises why there is
a performance gap between modern Datalog engines and hand-
written code, although modern engines use efﬁcient evaluation
techniques and sophisticated data structures for their evaluation. To
answer this question, we state the research hypothesis that current
Datalog engines do not adapt their evaluation according to their
input speciﬁcation.
In this work, we introduce a new angle to the problem: We
perceive the problem of executing Datalog as a program synthesis
problem whose goal is to automatically construct a program that
satisﬁes the input speciﬁcation. That is, we instantiate an analysis
tool given a declarative Datalog speciﬁcation of an analysis. While
efﬁcient synthesis from high-level to low-level imperative code has


──────── page 2/11 ────────

Input
Program
Extractor
Input Relations
Program
Analysis
Datalog Engine
Analysis
Result
Figure 1. Typical Program Analysis in Datalog using an Extractor
received attention in the past [18], the intricacies of synthesizing
Datalog to low-level imperative code has not received much atten-
tion, and general synthesis techniques cannot easily be adopted for
Datalog evaluation.
We introduce a novel technique that goes beyond straight forward
translations. Our synthesis approach is an adaptation of the semi-
naïve evaluation commonly used to evaluate Datalog programs.
However, our technique addresses several key aspects of generating
low-level imperative code from Datalog. Such aspects include the
generation of specialized work-list algorithms for computing ﬁxed-
points, generation of indices for faster data querying and specialized
data structures, among others. In this paper we show that Datalog-
based analysis can be just as fast and scalable as hand crafted tools.
The key insight is that the conversion from Datalog to low-level
code must be done with the speciﬁcs of Datalog in mind. Our
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our technique.
We are able to perform very large scale program analyses (millions
of variables, hundreds of attributes, billions of tuples) at a fraction
of the time compared to existing Datalog engines while being on
par with the state-of-the-art in hand crafted tools.
We aim to give an insight to future designers and implementors
of Datalog engines how to better optimize performance. While our
focus in this paper is on program analyzers, we believe that our
approach can be used to synthesize efﬁcient general programs from
Datalog. Our main contributions are:
• introducing a method of efﬁcient program synthesis from Data-
log analysis speciﬁcations
• specialization techniques for efﬁcient parallelization and adap-
tive data structures
• providing experimental results including a points-to analysis
written in Datalog that analyzes the OpenJDK1 library with
millions of variables in under a minute
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we motivate our
work by illustrating the performance gap between an analysis pro-
cessed by existing Datalog engine and an equivalent, handwritten
analysis. Sections 3-5 introduce our new program synthesis tech-
niques to generate from a Datalog input speciﬁcation executable
OpenMP/C++ code. Section 6 brieﬂy covers the implementation of
our approach within the Soufﬂé Datalog engine, and we demonstrate
the effectiveness of our new approach. We survey the related work
in Section 7 and draw relevant conclusions in Section 8.
2.
Motivation
An example architecture of a Datalog-based program analysis
framework is shown in Figure 1. An extractor translates the input
program to a collection of relations describing the relevant semantics
of the input program. The input relations of a Datalog program are
referred to as Extensional Database (EDB) in Datalog terminology.
The program analysis itself is expressed in form of rules that is
referred to as Intensional Database (IDB).
Consider the following, frequently occurring Datalog program
where the IDB consists of the following rules,
path (X,Y) :−edge (X,Y) .
path (X, Z) :−path (X,Y) , edge (Y, Z) .
and the query is ?path(X,Y). This program computes the transitive
closure path of a given relation edge as EDB. Such an analysis may,
for instance, be utilized to obtain a list of all reachable functions
within a call graph. A slightly extended variation also provides the
foundation for the widely applicable points-to analysis forming the
foundation of a large variety of static program analysis. The given
query can be converted into C++2 within a few minutes, solely
relying on constructs from the STL library. The central element is
outlined in the following code snippet:
using
Tuple = s t d : : array <int ,2 >;
using
R e l a t i o n = s t d : : set <Tuple >;
R e l a t i o n
edge ,
t c ;
/ /
f i l l
edge
r e l a t i o n
edge = someSource ( ) ;
/ /
eval
f i r s t
r u l e
t c = edge ;
/ /
eval
second
r u l e
auto
d e l t a = t c ;
while ( ! d e l t a . empty ( ) ) {
/ /
compute new
d e l t a
R e l a t i o n
nDelta ;
for ( const
auto& t1
:
d e l t a ) {
auto a = edge . lower_bound ({ t1 [ 1 ] , 0 } ) ;
auto b = edge . upper_bound ({ t1 [1]+1 ,0}) ;
for ( auto
i t
= a ;
i t
!= b ; ++ i t ) {
auto& t2 = ∗i t ;
Tuple
t r ({ t1 [ 0 ] , t2 [ 1 ] } ) ;
i f
( ! c o n t a i n s ( tc , t r ) ) {
nDelta . i n s e r t ( t r ) ;
}
}
}
/ /
i n s e r t
d e l t a
t c . i n s e r t ( nDelta . begin ( ) , nDelta . end ( ) ) ;
/ /
swap data
d e l t a . swap ( nDelta ) ;
}
It is crucial for the performance of the C++ code, that entries in the
edge relation are implicitly sorted enabling a range query for fast
access. When compiling the given code fragment with GCC 4.9.3
and applying it on a graph with 1.000 vertices connected by 10.000
random edges, the program takes ≈2.0s and 91MB to compute all
paths in the graph.
Executing the same problem on various Datalog engines takes
≈6.5s / 30MB (bddbddb), ≈340s / 1667MB (µZ), and ≈12.2s
/ 126.9MB (a SQLite based solver) on the same hardware (see
Section 6.1). The outcome of this simple experiment illustrates
the signiﬁcant performance gap between state-of-the-art Datalog
engines and hand-crafted code.
1 Java, JDK, and OpenJDK are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its
afﬁliates. Other names may be trademarks of their respective owners.
2 when referring to C++ we refer to the C++11 standard


──────── page 3/11 ────────

While it may be still viable to manually craft code for small
problems as outlined in the motivating problem, for a large scale,
fully featured analysis instance this becomes inviable. A real world
example may be comprised of hundreds of relations interlinked via
numerous, recursive references, making it an extremely tedious and
highly error prone programming task to manually write the analysis
from scratch in an efﬁcient way.
To overcome or at least alleviate the performance gap between
state-of-the-art Datalog engines and handcrafted code, we propose a
program synthesis approach to translate Datalog to specialized C++
code.
3.
Framework Overview
Our framework translates a Datalog program to an executable that
(1) adheres to the Datalog speciﬁcation and (2) is highly optimized.
We perform the program synthesis of Datalog speciﬁcations in
four major stages: The ﬁrst stage translates the declarative Datalog
program to an abstract syntax tree. The second stage translates the
abstract syntax tree to an abstract machine called the Relational
Algebra Machine (RAM). The intermediate representation of the
RAM features a concise set of relational algebra expressions,
relation management statements, and control ﬂow constructs with
parallelism. The third stage translates the RAM program to C++. In
the ﬁnal stage, the C++ program is translated to a binary executable.
The architecture of our program synthesis framework for Datalog
is depicted in Figure 2. The four stages have different intermediate
languages for representing the input program. In each stage, opti-
mizations are performed to achieve a highly-efﬁcient binary that is
able to perform computations of large relations in parallel.
In the ﬁrst stage, the Datalog speciﬁcation is parsed and trans-
lated to an abstract syntax tree (AST). Semantic checks are con-
ducted in this translational step including right usage of relation sym-
bols, type checks of proper use of variables, and checks for cyclic
negations among many other semantic checks. After the semantic
checks, optimizations are performed. Those AST optimizations can
also be perceived as a source-to-source translation, i.e., the input
program is transformed to a more efﬁcient input program (although
represented as AST). The optimizations include:
• constant propagation, i.e., the forwarding of constant values
within and among rules,
• alias elimination, i.e., the uniﬁcation of variables according to
equality constraints imposed by the user,
• rule elimination, i.e., the elimination of rules that do not con-
tribute when atoms in their bodies refer to empty relations, and
• relation elimination, i.e., the elimination of entire relations and
their rules, if they do not contribute towards the output.
In the second stage, the AST of the declarative input program
is translated to an imperative relational description before it can
be converted to C++. We introduce an abstract machine called the
“Relational Algebra Machine” (RAM) for this purpose. The interme-
diate representation of the RAM constitutes a concise, imperative
language providing a small set of simple control statements as well
as operators and expressions to manipulate the state of relations.
The lowering from a declarative Datalog program to an imperative
relational algebra machine program is performed by re-interpreting
the semi-naïve evaluation as a translation scheme [1]. The RAM rep-
resentation of an input program offers ample opportunities to apply
optimizations. Unlike on the AST level, mid-level optimizations may
target details of the evaluation process not visible in the declarative
speciﬁcation. Among the most important mid-level optimizations is
the conversion of simple traversal over relations to range queries and
the associated problem of ﬁnding appropriate indices to speed up the
evaluation of rules in form of nested join loops in RAM. The RAM
representation of an input program provides enough abstraction to
perform speciﬁc optimizations such as predicate leveling [1] and
other optimizations that would be too tedious at a low-level such as
C++.
The third stage converts the RAM immediate representation to
C++ code. The main challenge of this translational step is to generate
efﬁcient, high performance C++ code for processing and storing
information of in-memory relations. In our framework, we obtain
sufﬁcient performance by heavy use of C++ templates tailored for
the use of relational algebra operations and efﬁcient data structures
including various types of indices. For speciﬁc instances of relations
and operations we permit customizations of the code in the templates
to achieve maximal performance. Thus, essentially, a large part
of the actual code generation is deferred to the last translation,
i.e., the C++ compiler that translates the heavily templatized input
program to an executable program. The technique of scripting the
generation of code using C++ templates is also known as template
meta-programming. For example, if an actual type of an object
is known at compile-time the dynamic dispatch is converted to a
static call improving vastly the performance of the compiler. In
our speciﬁc use-case, our meta-programming becomes a partial
evaluator that pushes computations from runtime to compile-time if
they are static.
In the ﬁnal stage, the resulting C++ code is compiled to a binary
executable. The C++ compiler unfolds the template producing highly
efﬁcient assembly code that is specialized for a given input-program.
Using C++ makes the Datalog compilation independent of the actual
target architecture.
4.
Synthesizing from Datalog
The second stage synthesizes an imperative program from the
declarative Datalog program represented as an AST using a step-by-
step relational description of the input program. As aforementioned,
the intermediate representation is an abstract machine program
for the Relational Algebra Machine, i.e., an abstract machine
speciﬁcally designed for relational algebra. The input program
represented as a RAM program is further optimized using the
optimizing transformations.
4.1
Adapting Semi-Naïve Algorithm
For translating an AST to a RAM program, we use the semi-naïve
evaluation technique. The semi-naïve evaluation is a bottom-up
evaluation of a Datalog program, i.e., results are constructed from
the facts to the goal. In contrast to Prolog, this is possible because
the relations have a ﬁnite domain and they grow monotonically
until a ﬁxed-point is reached. Ullman has shown [35] that semi-
naïve evaluation is an efﬁcient evaluation strategy. There are various
survey papers and books discussing the semi-naïve evaluation for
evaluating Datalog programs including [1, 9, 28]. The semi-naïve
evaluation can be seen as a ﬁxed-point computation where relations
are initially empty. Clauses of the Datalog program are interpreted
as semantic equations and are applied in a Kleene-ﬁxed-point style,
until no more new knowledge can be gathered. The obtained ﬁxed-
point represents the smallest model-theoretical solution, which
coincides with the solution of the logical Datalog query [1].
For program synthesis, the semi-naïve evaluation is specialized
for a given set of rules. The specialization produces a series of ﬁxed-
point computations in form of a program. A different interpretation
is that a “Futamura projection” [12, 13] is used to obtain a special-
ized evaluation for a given IDB, i.e., the Semi-Naïve Evaluation [1]
can be seen as an interpreter that is specialized with its “static” in-
tensional database (i.e. the Datalog rules representing the program
analysis). As an outcome of the Futamura projection, we receive
a relational algebra machine program that expresses the computa-


──────── page 4/11 ────────

RAM
DL
AST
C++
High-Level
Optimizations
Mid-Level 
Optimizations
Parser
RAM Converter
Code Generator
BIN
C++ Compiler
Declarative
Imperative
Native
Relational 
Primitives
<uses>
Figure 2. Staged Compilation Framework for Synthesizing C++ Programs from a Datalog Speciﬁcation
Pi
dR'i
dRi
Current Ri
Previous
Delta
New
Figure 3. The semi-naïve evaluation splits recursively deﬁned
relations into subsets per ﬁxed-point iteration called previous,
current, delta, and new knowledge.
tion of the program analysis as a series of ﬁx-points performing
relational algebra operations.
To avoid that all recursively deﬁned relations are computed in
a single ﬁxed-point, the semi-naïve evaluator computes the data
dependencies between relations in form of a precedence graph.
Strongly-connected components (SCC) of the precedence graph
resemble mutually recursive relations, and code for a ﬁxed-point for
these relations is generated. The SCC graph of the precedence graph
represents a partial order that sequences the generated ﬁxed-points
and non-recursive rules such that the execution becomes efﬁcient.
Consider the following Datalog program:
a (X) :−b (X) , c (X) .
b ( 1 ) .
b (X) :−c (X) , d (X) .
c ( 2 ) .
c (X) :−b (X) , d (X) .
d ( 3 ) .
The fact d(3) of relation can be safely evaluated before all others,
i.e., number 3 is inserted into set d, since d is not depending on the
value of any other relation. Also, a can only be computed once b
and c have been computed, so the rules of relation a will be last to
be evaluated. However, for b and c there is no total order since rules
of both relations are mutually dependent on each other.
To avoid recurring computations, the semi-naïve evaluation
scheme keeps track of the previous, current, delta and new knowl-
edge of a recursively deﬁned relation as depicted in Figure 3. In this
context, knowledge is deﬁned as a set of tuples. In each iteration of
the ﬁxed-point iteration new knowledge is obtained, i.e., a new set
of tuples is discovered for a recursively deﬁned relation. The general
observation is that only new knowledge in the previous iteration
(i.e. delta knowledge) can generate new knowledge in the current
iteration. Hence, for each iteration, relations are sliced into (1) cur-
rent knowledge, which includes all the knowledge except the new
knowledge of the current iteration, and (2) in the new knowledge
gathered in the current iteration. With this partitioning of relations,
the ﬁxed-point will converge faster. In our semi-naïve code genera-
tion scheme we have for each recursively deﬁned relation two helper
relations: one relation that stores the new knowledge and another
Relational Algebra
Machine
Input
Relations
Output
Relations
RAM
Program
Figure 4. Relational Algebra Machine
relation that stores the delta knowledge. The previous knowledge is
deduced by set difference and is not stored explicitly.
For our example, the code generator emits code for a ﬁxed-point
calculation of relation b and c. The code fragment below outlines
the code generated for the example above:
b = {1} ; ∆b = b ;
c = {2} ; ∆c = c ;
while
(∆b ∪∆c ̸= ∅) {
new_b = (∆c ∩d ) \ b ;
new_c = (∆b ∩d ) \ c ;
b = b ∪new_b ;
c = c ∪new_c ;
∆b = new_b ;
∆c = new_c ;
}
Inside a loop, new knowledge is obtained for relations b and c
based on the ∆b and ∆c, i.e., the new knowledge of the previous
iteration. The loop is executed until the ∆sets become empty. For
more sophisticated queries, the notion of previous knowledge is
required, i.e., the state of the relation in the previous iteration. A
detailed description of the semi-naïve evaluation can be found in [1].
Once the relations b and c stabilize, a is computed by
a = b ∩c
and an overall solution of the Datalog program is obtained.
The illustrated code generation pattern for semi-naïve evalua-
tion can be generalized to an arbitrary Datalog program, and the
conversion from the AST to the RAM is using semi-naïve evalua-
tion as a code generator. For example, the motivating C++ example
using STL containers has been constructed employing semi-naïve
evaluation techniques.
4.2
Relational Algebra Machine
The Relational Algebra Machine (RAM) is an abstract machine that
is used as a semantic model for evaluating translated input programs.
The machine is speciﬁcally tailored for executing relational algebra
programs that are produced by the semi-naïve evaluation. The RAM
program contains relational algebra operations to compute results
produced by clauses, relation management operations to keep track
of previous, current and new knowledge in the semi-naïve evaluation,


──────── page 5/11 ────────

and imperative constructs including statement composition for
sequencing the operations, and loop construction with loop exit
condition to express ﬁxed-points computations for recursively-
deﬁned relations. We also extend the machine to execute statements
in parallel via a parallel-statement. The parallel-statement processes
a list of sub-statements in parallel and blocks until all of those
have been completed. The static nature of a RAM program ensures
that optimizations can be performed effectively, e.g., indexing, load
balancing, etc.
The abstract machine operates solely on relations, which are sets
of tuples. It has no explicit notion of variables and/or memory. The
evaluation of a RAM program entails maintaining a collection of
relations as a state for executing a RAM program. The relations
are ﬁxed throughout the execution of a RAM program, i.e., no new
relation is added or deleted to/from the state whilst executing the
program. However, the contents of a relation may change. Figure 4
depicts the execution model of a relational algebra machine program.
There is a set of relations that the program operates on. Some of the
relation are pre-loaded with data, e.g., the tuples deﬁned by the facts
in the original input program.
A RAM program is able to express nested join loops to execute
Datalog clauses and the book-keeping portions of code for the
ﬁxed-point calculations. For example the rule of the previous code
fragment
new_b = (∆c ∩d ) \ b ;
is represented in RAM with a corresponding nested join loop similar
to
for ( x ∈∆c
)
for
( y ∈d )
i f
( x == y ∧x /∈b )
b = b ∪{x}
which will then be optimized by mid-level optimizations to
for ( x ∈∆c
)
i f
( x ∈d ∧x /∈b )
b = b ∪{x}
The RAM has the ability to express range queries for fast
membership tests and simple searches. The RAM engine permits
a wide range of optimizations including the selection of indices,
and condition leveling, i.e., breaking conditions up and placing
predicates to the most-outer loop in the loop-nest.
The statements of the relational algebra machine are listed below
in BNF notation:
S →insert O
O →search R [where C] do O1
O →project (V1, . . . , Vk) into R1
S →merge R1 into R2
S →swap R1 and R2
S →purge R
S →S1; S2
S →loop S1 endloop
S →exit C
S →par S1|| . . . ||Sk endpar
The statement insert represents a relational algebra statement
performing the evaluation of a clause where O is a relational
operation including cross product, selection and projection. Note
the relational algebra machine has no high-level INSERT/SELECT
statement as provided by the SQL standard, instead the nested join
loop is expressed as cascaded searches followed by a project. The
semantics of a search is the traversal over all tuples in relation R,
and tests whether for a tuple the condition C holds. If it holds,
the attached operation O1 is executed recursively passing on the
currently selected tuple of the traversal and the selected tuples
of outer traversals. If the condition does not hold, the operation
O1 is skipped and the next tuple is assessed until the end of
the relation is reached. The statement merge adds all tuples of
relation R1 to relation R2. The statement purge deletes all tuples in
relation R. The statement swap swaps the contents of two relations.
Statements can be sequenced by semicolon by S1; S2 such that S1
is executed prior to S2. Loops are formed with statement loop . . .
endloop and can be terminated with exit C inside the loop body. The
statement par S1|| . . . ||Sk endpar represents the parallel execution
of statements S1, . . . , Sk. It continues executing until all statements
S1, . . . , Sk have been terminated. The sequence instruction and the
parallel instruction implements a series-parallel based programming
model. Note that the code generator is responsible for producing
code that does not contain races since the consistency is not enforced
by the abstract machine, i.e., a parallel section does not allow the
parallel execution of two or more project statements that perform
insertions on the same table.
We demonstrate the translation from AST to RAM using the
example from Section 2, which computes the transitive closure of
the binary relation edge and stores the result in the relation path:
edge ( 1 , 2 ) .
edge ( 2 , 3 ) .
path (X,Y) :−edge (X,Y) .
path (X, Z) :−path (X,Y) , edge (Y, Z) .
The SCC graph of the example above contains two components.
A non-recursive component that contains the relation edge and a
recursive component path. The topological order will enforce the
evaluation of relation edge before relation path. In the ﬁrst step, the
tuples of the facts are loaded in the relation edge. In the second step
the path relation is computed recursively. The relaxed semi-naïve
evaluation lowers the Datalog program above into the program as
shown in Figure 5. In the example, the rule
path (X,Y) :−edge (X,Y) .
is non-recursive and is executed outside the ﬁxpoint-loop. The tuples
of the relation path are transferred to the relation delta_path for boot-
strapping the ﬁx-point loop. Inside the loop, the recursive rule
path (X, Z) :−path (X,Y) , edge (Y, Z) .
is translated to a nested join loop. The loop terminates if no new
knowledge can be found. At the end of a loop iteration the tuples of
new_path are transferred to delta_path for the next iteration.
4.3
Index Selection
Range queries are query operations on indices. Since indices are
costly, one would ultimately desire a minimal set of indices for a
given relation. To ﬁnd a minimal set of indices, we employ a discrete
optimization problem and have devised a solver for it.
Consider a relation r with 3 attributes X, Y , and Z that is used
in the following rule:
a (X) :−b (X) ,
r (X,Y,X) , c (Y) .
which searches for all values in the relation r where the ﬁrst and the
last component is of a value X stored in b and checks then whether
the second component is also present in the relation c. The nested
join loop of the loop may be the following one:
for ( x ∈b )
for (
( y , z ,w) ∈{( y , z ,w) ∈r | y = x ∧w = x} )
i f
(
z ∈c ∧x /∈a
)
a = a ∪{x}


──────── page 6/11 ────────

/ /
populate
f a c t
t u p l e s
project
(1 ,
2)
into
edge ;
project
(2 ,
3)
into
edge ;
/ /
r u l e :
path (X , Y ) :−edge (X , Y ) .
i n s e r t
search
edge do
project
( edge [ 0 ] , edge [ 1 ] )
into
path ;
/ /
c r e a t e
d e l t a
knowledge
f o r
f i r s t
i t e r a t i o n
merge path
into
d e l t a _ p a t h ;
/ /
f i x e d −p o i n t
loop
loop
/ /
r e s e t
hel per
r e l a t i o n
purge new_path ;
/ /
r u l e :
path (X , Z ) :−edge (X , Y ) ,
path (Y , Z ) .
i n s e r t
search
edge do
search
d e l t a _ p a t h
where (
( edge [ 1 ] = d e l t a _ p a t h [ 0 ] )
and
( ( edge [ 0 ] , d e l t a _ p a t h [ 1 ] )
not
in
path )
) do
project
( edge [ 0 ] , d e l t a _ p a t h [ 1 ] )
into
new_path
;
/ /
f i x p o i n t
reached ?
e x i t
c o u n t t u p l e s ( new_path ) = 0;
/ /
book−keeping
merge new_path
into
path ;
swap new_path and
d e l t a _ p a t h ;
endloop
Figure 5. RAM program for Datalog program with helper relations
new_path and delta_path that store the new knowledge of the current
and previous iteration, respectively.
where the second loop is an application of a range query on the
relation r. To effectively query all elements of r with a given value
for the ﬁrst attribute X and last attribute Z a corresponding index on
the relation is required. For instance, an index sorting all elements
according to the attribute order X ≺Z would be suitable. So would
be an index ordered by Z ≺X, X ≺Z ≺Y , or Z ≺X ≺Y . The
latter two are even supporting an efﬁcient query on all 3 attributes
while only those starting with an X support queries on the X
attribute only. This observation, that indices may be shared among
several queries, is utilized by our index selection optimization. The
transformation collects all search patterns for a relation that are used
in range queries, and computes the minimal set of indices using a
discrete optimization problem. The indices will then be created at
the creation-time of a relation and are maintained throughout the
lifetime of a relation.
5.
Native Optimizations
In the third stage, a RAM program is translated to a templatized C++
program. The templatized C++ program realizes efﬁcient relational
algebra operations including emptiness checks, membership tests,
scans, range queries, insertions, and union operations. As we show in
Section 6 the most performance critical operations are the insertion
and query operations. It is therefore of paramount importance to
have an effective code generator using templates that generates
efﬁcient data structures for relations and their operations.
5.1
Data Structures
In our execution model we keep relations in memory. Given the
increasing availability of computers with terabytes of memory, this
is a viable option. There are many different data structures that can
operate on relations stored in memory including Hashes, Trees, Tries,
Bit-vectors, or Sorted lists. However, most of the aforementioned
data structures are not suitable for very large relations. For example,
Hashes, while being efﬁcient for inserts and membership tests,
do not provide acceptable range query support and the hash table
size deteriorates the cache performance, and as a consequence the
overall run-time. Sorted lists are expensive for insertions and Bit-
vectors require large amounts of space, in particular for higher-
dimensional tuples. In our experience, the only viable approaches
to store very large relations are balanced search trees and Tries.
For these membership tests and range queries exhibit a worst-case
execution time of O(log(N)).
Among various types of balanced search trees, B-trees, which
were originally designed for secondary storage data structures, are
known to be the most memory efﬁcient and cache effective data
structures. Therefore, we employ in-memory B-trees as our primary
data structure for storing very large relations to obtain performance.
However, a reorganization of B-trees becomes costly for executing
relational operations in parallel. To overcome this issue for some
relations, we introduce an alternative datastructure that is based on
geometrically encoded Tries. The choice of the data-structure is
dependent on the relation and its use. Both implementations are
interchangeable, since both data structures use the same API.
In the evaluation of the respective performance trade-offs be-
tween B-trees and Tries we discovered that in our use-cases, Tries
provide better performance for relations with one or two attributes.
We provide experimental evidence in Section 6.1 for the selection
of the possible data structure. With a growing number of attributes,
the Trie data structure becomes ineffective in terms of run-time
and memory consumption, and the B-tree outperforms the trie data
structure. From our empirical analysis, we derived the following
decision table:
# of
Number of Indices
attributes
0 −1
≥2
0
ﬂag
-
1 −2
Trie
Trie
3 −5
B-tree
B-tree
6 −n
B-tree
blocked list + indirect B-tree index
Based on the number of attributes and the number of indices we are
switching between B-tree and Trie which store the relation directly.
This is also known as indexed-organized tables. For relations with
many attributes, the table is stored in a blocked list and indices
contain pointers pointing to the records in the list in order to save
memory.
The data structures are written in a template meta-programming
library that also provides the mechanisms to choose the right
data structure for a given relations and hence simpliﬁes the code
generation.
5.2
Specialization
Besides the selection of the data structure, additional parameters
enable the C++ template mechanisms to produce very specialized
code for each individual relation within the resulting program. Those
parameters include:
• arity – the number of attributes of the tuples to be stored in a
relation
• primary index order – the order to be utilized for sorting
attributes in the main data store of a relation; also the index
utilized for membership tests;


──────── page 7/11 ────────

• secondary index orders – a list of indices to be associated and
automatically maintained for a relation; queries may select those
instead of the primary index if more suitable
Those template parameters are utilized to synthesize, e.g., com-
parison operators and search operations on B-tree keys and nodes
speciﬁcally tailored for the individual use cases. As a consequence,
the optimizing C++ compiler is enabled to conduct more low-level
code optimizations due to considerably reduced data dependent con-
trol ﬂow decisions. Essentially, every relation and every index gets
its very own, specialized implementation.
5.3
Parallelization
There are two elements to be consider to effectively utilize contem-
porary hardware: caches and parallel cores. The effective utilization
of caches is achieved by choosing appropriate data structures. To
harvest the computational power of parallel cores, the code generator
issues parallel constructs.
A Datalog program provides ample of opportunities for paral-
lelization. The most relevant code portions to parallelize are the
executions of nested join loop. For instance, the loop nest
for ( x ∈b )
for (
( y , z ,w) ∈{( y , z ,w) ∈r | y = x ∧w = x} )
i f
(
z ∈c ∧x /∈a
)
a = a ∪{x}
can be parallelized by partitioning the relation b and distributing
the partition among multiple, parallel resources. However, to be a
valid transformation, all operations conducted within the loop nest
have to be thread safe. Note that scanning, querying and checking
for memberships are pure read-only operations which can always
be processed safely in parallel. The only critical operation is the
insertion of new values into a in the innermost loop. This update
operation on the set-representation of a needs to be synchronized.
However, the synchronization only needs to protect concurrent in-
serts. A protection against e.g., concurrent scan and insert operations
is not necessary since such combinations cannot occur in a RAM
program produced by the semi-naïve evaluation strategy.
To protect concurrent inserts for B-trees, several strategies
are available. The simplest one is to protect concurrent insertion
operations by locking the entire tree, thus sequentializing updates.
Unfortunately, this also severely limits the parallel efﬁciency of
the resulting code since due to lock contention, threads block each
other in the execution of insert operations. Consequently, a locking
strategy involving the underlying data structure on a ﬁner granularity
is required.
For Tries the synchronization operation for insertions can be
implemented using atomic updates, thus realizing a lock-free data
structure. Whenever a new node is inserted, a null-pointer some-
where in the structure will be atomically updated to point to the new
node. If the update fails, the insertion procedure is simply re-started.
This lead to a highly scalable parallel implementation.
For B-trees on the other hand, the synchronization is a bigger
challenge since insertions are not restricted to updating a single
memory location. In the general case, keys and child pointers need
to be shifted and potentially parent nodes split and re-balanced. The
application of a ﬁne-grained read/write locking scheme protecting
all the nodes potentially affected by an insert operation and releasing
locks as early as possible provided acceptable scalability on desktop
systems. However, on multi-socket server systems the continued
exchange of updates on the lock associated to the root node over
the inter-chip buses caused a severe slow-down in performance
and scalability. As a result, even with the ﬁne-grained locking
parallelism on multi-socket systems did not provide any net gains in
performance.
Tool
Time [s]
Memory [MB]
C++
2.0
91
bddbddb
6.5
30
µZ
340
1667
SQLite
12.2
126.9
Soufﬂé / B-tree (sequential)
1.26
25.6
Soufﬂé / B-tree (parallel)
0.42
26.3
Soufﬂé / Trie (sequential)
0.38
3.5
Soufﬂé / Trie (parallel)
0.12
4.5
Table 1. Comparison of Datalog evaluation tools for random-graph
connectivity problem.
To overcome this limitation we adapted an optimistic locking
schema from databases. In this approach, every node in the tree is
annotated by a version number which will be updated upon every
modiﬁcation. When a thread is reading a node while navigating the
B-tree during an insert operation, it is recording the version number
before starting its operation and comparing it after determining the
next node to navigate to. If the version number remained unchanged,
it continues by navigating to the resolved node. However, if the
version number changed, some other thread has modiﬁed the content
of the processed node while the read operation was in progress. Thus,
the obtained result may be wrong. To correct, the thread simply
restarts the read operation on the same node again.
Compared to the ﬁne-grained locking, the optimistic locking
approach does not update any memory location (or lock state) when
there are no conﬂicts – which is the case in the vast majority of node
traversals. Thus, communication between sockets is signiﬁcantly
reduced, leading to largely superior parallel scalability compared to
the ﬁne-grained locking solution.
For our implementation we are utilizing the primitives provided
by OpenMP to mark corresponding loops to be processed in parallel.
Thus, the degree of parallelism can be controlled by the user.
6.
Experimental Results
We have implemented our program synthesis techniques for Datalog
within Soufﬂé– a high performance Datalog engine for large-scale
program analysis. Soufﬂé has been designed for the highest perfor-
mance and scalability. Currently, the Soufﬂé project is undergoing
an open source licencing process and is expected to be released for
general use in the ﬁrst half of 2016. The following sub-sections
provide experimental data regarding our system’s performance char-
acteristics compared to state-of-the-art Datalog engines that have
been used for static program analysis in literature.
6.1
Transitive Closure
Our ﬁrst experiment targets the evaluation of our motivating example
introduced in Section 2. In this example, the transitive closure of a
random graph has been computed utilizing a variety of tools. The
experiments have been conducted on a 8 core Intel i7-5820K CPU
@ 3.30GHz. Table 1 summarizes the observed execution times and
memory requirements.
The C++ entry in the table corresponds to the implementation of
the transitive closure using standard C++ containers as outlined in
the motivation section. The results of the bddbddb and µZ rows have
been obtained utilizing the corresponding tools. The SQLite evalua-
tion is based on the consecutive execution of SQL statements accord-
ing to the semi-naïve evaluation scheme utilizing the in-memory
relational database system SQLite. All three represent manifes-
tations of distinct concepts for their internal data representation.
However, all of them, some severely, fail to compete with the naïve
C++ implementation in terms of execution time and only bddbddb
manages to obtain the result by consuming less memory.


──────── page 8/11 ────────

Tool
Time [hh:mm::ss]
Memory [GB]
bddbddb
0:30:00
5.7
µZ
DNF
DNF
SQLite
6:20:00
40.2
Soufﬂé (sequential)
0:01:15
7.5
Soufﬂé (parallel)
0:00:35
8.5
Table 2. Comparison of Datalog evaluation tools for a context-
insensitive points-to analysis on the OpenJDK7 library.
In comparison, our Soufﬂé engine is capable to improve upon
the naïve C++ performance by decreasing the execution time by
40% and using less then 1/3 of the memory requirements running
in a sequential, B-tree based mode. By using our Trie-based data
structure, an execution over 16x faster with less than 1/20 of the
memory requirements can be observed.
The signiﬁcant execution time reduction of Soufﬂé compared to
the naïve C++ version is based on the improved cache utilization due
to the employment of cache friendly, low overhead data structures,
the specialization of the involved data structures for the particular
use case, and the employment of ﬁne-grained parallelization to
effectively and efﬁciently utilize concurrent hardware resources.
However, Soufﬂé’s higher level optimizations, in particular it’s
automated index selection capability, is not coming into effect in
this small transitive closure example. Neither is Soufﬂé’s capability
of managing relations comprising billions of tuples. For this, a large
scale real-world analysis needs to be considered.
6.2
A Real-World Benchmark
A points-to analysis (which program variable is pointing to which
object) is a core analysis for a variety of static program analysis,
including, escape analysis, loop-dependency analysis and security
analyses. The corresponding points-to analysis can be formulated
as a Datalog query. To evaluate the various elements contributing
to the performance of Soufﬂé we have evaluated the application of
a context-insensitive version of the points-to analysis on the entire
code base of the OpenJDK library containing 1.4M variables, 350K
heap objects, 160K methods, 590K invocations and 17K types.
Table 2 summarizes the performance characteristics of various
state-of-the-art tools for Datalog based program analysis for the
given problem statement. All of them have been processing the
same Datalog program comprising several dozen relations and rules
producing ≈840M resulting tuples when being applied to the
OpenJDK7 input set. The evaluations of the bddbddb, µZ and
SQLite and based analysis have been conducted on a 8 core Intel
Xeon E5-2690 v2 @ 3.0GHz, 128GB RAM server system due to
resource and licencing constraints, while the Soufﬂé experiments
have been conducted on a 4 core Intel i7-4790 CPU @ 3.6GHz,
32GB RAM desktop system. However, the huge performance gap
between the various approaches are far beyond what can arise from
the performance discrepancy of the hardware.
For µZ the size of the resulting Datalog query has been too large
to obtain results within a reasonable time (DNF = did not ﬁnish).
Also, the SQL engine based Datalog solver required a signiﬁcant
amount of computation time, rendering it practically unsuitable for
the development of real-world, large scale analysis. bddbddb could
handle the query within much more reasonable time scales. For this
real-world benchmark Soufﬂé is capable of computing the desired
result more than 34x faster then the best state-of-the-art solver – a
factor that moves the development of more sophisticated large-scale
static programming analysis from the realm of academic exercises
into practical reality.
Operation
% time
# calls
Inserts
≈45%
≈200G
Membership Test
≈35%
≈180G
Range Queries
≈15%
≈20M
Scans
≈5%
<inlined >
Rest
<1%
-
Table 3. Runtime Proﬁle of points-to Analysis run on OpenJDK7
6.2.1
Performance Breakdown
During the course of the development of Soufﬂé we have used the
context insensitive version of the points-to analysis as a benchmark
to trace the gradual improvement steps of our system. Thus, we can
provide additional insight on the speciﬁc gains that can be obtained
by integrating various optimizations.
Table 3 summarizes proﬁling data collected from the execution of
a single Soufﬂé based run of the points-to analysis on the OpenJDK7
dataset. As can be observed, the vast majority of time (> 99%) is
spent on operations on sets. In particular, insert operations and
membership tests, which are triggered several billion times, account
for ≈80% of the overall execution time. Thus, the corresponding
operations have been a highly valuable target for optimizations.
Unfortunately, each evaluation only consumes fractions of a micro
second, leading to the necessity of resorting to a variety of low-level
optimization steps in the implementation as well as modiﬁcations
improving the cache utilization.
Figure 6 outlines the series of major development steps our sys-
tem was undergoing, visualizing the gradual reduction of execution
time and memory consumption.
The base line for our comparison is given on the left by the initial
version of the C++ code Soufﬂé has been producing for computing
Datalog queries. This initial version required ≈850s and roughly
17GB of memory, which already constituted a vast improvement
over preexisting solvers. However, the subsequent improvement
steps could reduce the execution time by an additional 93% and
the memory consumption by up to 59% for the given real-world
benchmark.
The ﬁrst optimization was reducing the management overhead
by reducing the number of maintained indices for each relation to a
minimum which reduced the execution time by ≈200s. The next
major optimization refers to storing tuples in the index structure
if only a single index is required for a relation. This improved
cache efﬁciency, thus reduced the execution time by ≈138s and the
memory consumption by ≈7GB. It was followed by a switch to
a custom B-tree implementation (57s improvement) followed by a
sequence of low level optimizations including the manual re-write of
recursive code into iterative code (35s), and the reduction of control
ﬂow dependencies – thus pipeline hazards – in the tuple comparison
operators (33s). To exploit the temporal locality of resulting query
operations, which frequently query sequences of nearby elements
in the data relations, we remember last accessed nodes as hints for
future operations. This resulted in avoiding redundant lookups (≈
90% hit rate) and a run-time reduction of another ≈122s. Next,
we customized the implementation of the binary search operation
frequently performed by B-tree operations. The effect was an
improved effectiveness of operations and a run-time reduction of
additional 50s. The utilization of a 3-way comparison instead of
consecutive binary comparison operators, the improvement of the
set-merge operation by ensuring that the smaller is added to the
larger set, the adaptation of node-split strategies to increase the ﬁll
rate of nodes, and the utilization of locally available delta-sets as a
ﬁlter for membership tests decreased the run-time by an additional
≈97s. The introduction of our Trie based data structure for binary


──────── page 9/11 ────────

Figure 6. Breakdown of Performance Improvements
Absolute
Relative
Step
Time [s]
Reduction
Speedup
semi-naïve on SQL engine
22800
-
-
C++ Encoding
850
−96%
26.8×
Index Consolidation
650
−24%
1.3×
A&D Tuning
75
−88%
8.7×
Parallelization
35
−53%
2.1×
Total
35
−99.8%
651×
Table 4. Performance Improvement Breakdown for context-
insensitive points-to analysis on OpenJDK7
relations reduced the execution time by an additional 22s and the
memory usage to 7.5GB. Finally, by parallelizing our engine we
managed to reduce the computation time to less than a minute on our
test system at the expense of sightly increased memory requirements.
Table 4 summarizes the incremental gains achieved over a SQL
based datalog engine by encoding queries in C++, minimizing the
number of utilized indices, conducting the manual tuning steps
on basic algorithms and data structures as outlined above, and
parallelization. Unfortunately, due to interdependencies between the
various optimization steps outlined in this section, their individual
impact can not be evaluated in more detail.
6.2.2
Comparison to Manual Implementation
Within recent work, the points-to problem over the OpenJDK library
has been investigated in detail and a specialized, graph based
algorithm for its efﬁcient computation has been devised [11] in
Java. In particular, the proposed solution comprises specialized
data structures to effectively represent and compute the points-to
relation. The work has the groundbreaking capability of obtaining
the analysis results for the OpenJDK library in under a minute.
With our Datalog engine the same result on the same dataset
can be obtained utilizing a general purpose analysis infrastructure
within 35s on a commodity desktop system. This result provides an
indication on the competitiveness of our Datalog engine in regard to
manually encoded static program analysis.
6.3
Large-Scale Analysis
Our last experiment evaluates Soufﬂé’s capability of providing the
computational framework exceeding the practical capabilities of
state-of-the-art solvers when processing even more sophisticated
Tool
Time [hh:mm::ss]
Memory [GB]
bddbddb
DNF
DNF
µZ
DNF
DNF
SQLite
DNF
DNF
Soufﬂé (parallel, 8 cores)
6:44:08
825.77GB
Table 5. Comparison of Datalog evaluation tools for a context-
sensitive points-to analysis on the OpenJDK7 library.
large-scale analysis. To that end, we have been processing a context-
sensitive points-to analysis on OpenJDK7 build 147. The context-
sensitive analysis is a 2-Object-1-Heap points-to analysis [19] using
an open-world abstraction [2]. The evaluation has been conducted
on a 8 core Intel Xeon E5-2690 v2 @ 3.0GHz server system. Table 5
summarizes the obtained results.
Only Soufﬂé has been able to cope with the large-scale pro-
gram analysis problem for analyzing context-sensitive points-to on
OpenJDK.
7.
Related Work
Datalog Engines.
In this section we describe brieﬂy survey state-
of-the-art Datalog engines and their use in the context of static
program analysis. bddbddb [37] is one of the most popular Datalog
engines for static program analysis. The main challenge in using
bddbddb for large systems relates to the issue of variable ordering.
As it is uses BDDs (binary decision diagrams) as the underlying
structure, choosing the right ordering is of paramount importance.
Otherwise, the analysis does not terminate within reasonable bounds.
In our experimentation the default variable ordering did not work
for the JDK but after signiﬁcant exploration we were able to get
it working. However, this variable ordering was not useful for the
analysis of a different version of the JDK. Such repeated exploration
to ﬁnd suitable variable orderings is too time consuming for bddbddb
to be useful in our context. µZ [16] is another tool that does very well
on small examples. However, the tool was unable to handle the large
data sets generated during the analysis of the JDK. However, our
approach still improves on its performance. A common difference
between the aforementioned Datalog engines and Soufﬂé is that
they perform Datalog evaluation whereas we use Datalog as a
speciﬁcation to synthesize a C++ program.
In [31] and [33], source-to-source translators from Datalog to
SQL were introduced. Unfortunately, current relational database


──────── page 10/11 ────────

management systems cannot cope with the vast amounts of data and
complex queries that arise translating Datalog to SQL. Other systems
such as IRIS [6] and DLV [5] provide support for Datalog execution.
Both of them are bottom-up rule inference engines. However, they
cannot be used as a stand-alone system. They provide the basic
knowledge base component and the actual application needs to be
written in a language like C++. Datalog Education System [30] is a
deductive database system that supports querying via both Datalog
and SQL. Their focus is to support SQL queries in Datalog and
thus translate SQL into Datalog. Socialite [32] provides extensions
to Datalog to facilitate parallel execution. The aim is to speed up
various graph algorithms and hence provide support for features
such as aggregation. The programmer needs to provide suitable
annotations to enable effective parallelization on distributed systems.
None of these tools are suitable for static program analysis either
due to their design targeting different application domains or will
have performance issues tackling large data with billion tuples in
relations.
Liu and Stoller [22] describe a general method for transforming
Datalog rules to SETL programs. Their focus is on guaranteed
worst-case time and space complexities. They use a mixture of
arrays and linked list to manipulate the various sets. While this is
useful in guaranteeing worst-case complexities their experiments
are on relatively small data sets. Thus, it is not clear if their
approach can handle large data sets. There are other approaches
to implementing Datalog engines using GPUs [24] that harness
the parallel capabilities of accelerators. In their work, tables may
store the same tuple several times, and enforcing a set constraint
at a later stage becomes costly, dominating the overall execution
time. The duplication of tuples depletes the GPU memory quickly,
and memory limitations of contemporary GPUs just amplify the
short-coming of their approach for large-scale program analysis.
Synthesis of Analyzers.
In our context, program synthesis refers
to the classical notion for it [21] i.e., constructing an executable
program (i.e., program analyzer) from a logical speciﬁcation (i.e.,
in Datalog). We refer the reader to [20] for a survey of program
synthesis techniques and uses. While our framework can also be
used to generate C++ programs from Datalog speciﬁcations, our
focus in this paper is efﬁcient synthesis of program analyzers, i.e, we
generate C++ programs that take a program as a set of relations and
produce analysis results in output relations. Several frameworks have
been cast as a synthesis of analyzers and/or veriﬁers e.g.,[14, 17],
and to a lesser extent [16, 23, 27]. While our approach shares
similarities of specifying the analysis in a logical speciﬁcation
(Datalog Horn clauses) we generate a stand-alone C++ analysis
tool rather than solving clauses within the framework/engine itself.
As shown in our experiments, this results in signiﬁcant performance
gains. The approach in [7], like us, uses partial evaluation of Datalog
to improve performance. Additionally, several compilers perform
efﬁcient code generation using synthesis techniques [18, 26]. This
body of work, like our technique, synthesizes efﬁcient code form
a logical speciﬁcation; unlike our work, these approaches generate
general programs optimized at the assembly level, where as we
generate analysis tools optimized at the C++ level, adhering to a
Datalog speciﬁcation.
8.
Conclusion
We have presented a Datalog-based analysis framework that instead
of evaluating Datalog, uses the semi-naïve algorithm as a synthesis
scaffold to produce analyzer instances. Our technique converts
Datalog speciﬁcations to efﬁcient, parallel C++ code. As a result,
we are able to analyze very large code bases and perform analyses
considerably more efﬁciently then the available state-of-the-art
Datalog engines. While our work focuses on static analyzers, we
believe that our approach can also be used as an efﬁcient general
purpose engine for compiling Datalog to efﬁcient C++ translations.
Our work has been realized in the Soufﬂé framework which is
currently undergoing an open-source process and is estimated to be
publicly available in the ﬁrst half of 2016.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our colleagues at Oracle Labs, Brisbane and
Nicholas Hollingum.
References
[1] S. Abiteboul, R. Hull, and V. Vianu.
Foundations of Databases.
Addison-Wesley, 1995. ISBN 0-201-53771-0.
[2] N. Allen, P. Krishnan, and B. Scholz.
Combining type-analysis
with points-to analysis for analyzing java library source-code.
In
Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on
State of the Art in Program Analysis, SOAP 2015, pages 13–18, New
York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[3] N. Allen, B. Scholz, and P. Krishnan. Staged points-to analysis for
large code bases. In B. Franke, editor, Compiler Construction, volume
9031 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 131–150. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2015.
[4] M. Alpuente, M. A. Feliú, C. Joubert, and A. Villanueva. Datalog-based
program analysis with BES and RWL. In Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Datalog Reloaded, pages 1–20. Springer-
Verlag, 2011.
[5] M. Alviano, W. Faber, N. Leone, S. Perri, G. Pfeifer, and G. Terracina.
The disjunctive Datalog system DLV. In Datalog Reloaded - First
International Workshop, volume LNCS 6702, pages 282–301. Springer,
March 2010.
[6] B. Bishop and F. Fischer. IRIS - integrated rule inference system.
In Workshop on Advancing Reasoning on the Web: Scalability and
Commonsense. CEUR-WS.org, June 2008.
[7] S. Brass and H. Stephan. A variant of earley deduction with partial
evaluation. In W. Faber and D. Lembo, editors, Web Reasoning and
Rule Systems, volume 7994 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 35–49. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[8] M. Bravenboer and Y. Smaragdakis. Strictly declarative speciﬁcation
of sophisticated points-to analyses. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM
SIGPLAN Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems Lan-
guages and Applications, OOPSLA ’09, pages 243–262, New York,
NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[9] S. Ceri, G. Gottlob, and L. Tanca.
What you always wanted to
know about datalog (and never dared to ask). IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 1(1):146–166, 1989.
[10] S. Dawson, C. R. Ramakrishnan, and D. S. Warren. Practical program
analysis using general purpose logic programming systems – a case
study. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 1996 Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’96, pages
117–126, New York, NY, USA, 1996. ACM.
[11] J. Dietrich, N. Hollingum, and B. Scholz. Giga-scale exhaustive points-
to analysis for java in under a minute. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented Programming,
Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2015, pages 535–551,
New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[12] Y. Futamura. Partial evaluation of computation process - an approach to
a compiler-compiler. Higher Order Symbol. Comput., 12(4):381–391,
Dec. 1999. ISSN 1388-3690.
[13] R. Glück. Is there a fourth futamura projection? In Proceedings of the
2009 ACM SIGPLAN Workshop on Partial Evaluation and Program
Manipulation, PEPM ’09, pages 51–60, New York, NY, USA, 2009.
ACM.
[14] S. Grebenshchikov, N. P. Lopes, C. Popeea, and A. Rybalchenko.
Synthesizing software veriﬁers from proof rules. In Proceedings of the
33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design


──────── page 11/11 ────────

and Implementation, PLDI ’12, pages 405–416, New York, NY, USA,
2012. ACM.
[15] T. J. Green, S. S. Huang, B. T. Loo, and W. Zhou. Datalog and recursive
query processing. Foundations and Trends in Databases, 5(2):105–195,
2013.
[16] K. Hoder, N. Bjørner, and L. M. de Moura. µZ – An efﬁcient engine
for ﬁxed points with constraints. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, volume LNCS 6806, pages
457–462. Springer, 2011.
[17] H. Hojjat, P. Rümmer, P. Subotic, and W. Yi.
Horn clauses for
communicating timed systems. In Proceedings First Workshop on Horn
Clauses for Veriﬁcation and Synthesis, HCVS 2014, Vienna, Austria,
17 July 2014., pages 39–52, 2014.
[18] R. Joshi, G. Nelson, and K. Randall. Denali: A goal-directed super-
optimizer. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2002 Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’02, pages
304–314, New York, NY, USA, 2002. ACM.
[19] G. Kastrinis and Y. Smaragdakis. Hybrid context-sensitivity for points-
to analysis. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2013 conference on
Programming language design and implementation, PLDI ’13, New
York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[20] E. Kitzelmann. Inductive programming: A survey of program synthesis
techniques. In U. Schmid, E. Kitzelmann, and R. Plasmeijer, editors,
Approaches and Applications of Inductive Programming, volume 5812
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 50–73. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2010.
[21] C. Kreitz. Program synthesis. In W. Bibel and P. Schmitt, editors,
Automated Deduction – A Basis for Applications, volume III, chapter
III.2.5, pages 105–134. Kluwer, 1998.
[22] Y. A. Liu and S. D. Stoller. From datalog rules to efﬁcient programs
with time and space guarantees. ACM Transactions on Programming
Languages and Systems, 31(6), 2009.
[23] LogicBlox Inc. Declartive cloud platform for applications that combine
transactions & analytics. http://www.logicblox.com.
[24] C. A. Martínez-Angeles, I. Dutra, V. S. Costa, and J. Buenabad-
Chávez. A datalog engine for GPUs. In Declarative Programming and
Knowledge Management, LNCS 8439, pages 152–168. Springer, 2014.
[25] M. Naik, A. Aiken, and J. Whaley. Effective static race detection for
Java. SIGPLAN Not., 41(6):308–319, June 2006. ISSN 0362-1340.
[26] P. M. Phothilimthana, T. Jelvis, R. Shah, N. Totla, S. Chasins, and
R. Bodik. Chlorophyll: Synthesis-aided compiler for low-power spatial
architectures. In Proceedings of the 35th ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’14,
pages 396–407, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM.
[27] Y. S. Ramakrishna, C. R. Ramakrishnan, I. V. Ramakrishnan, S. A.
Smolka, T. Swift, and D. S. Warren. Efﬁcient model checking using
tabled resolution. In Computer Aided Veriﬁcation (CAV ’97). Springer-
Verlag, 1997.
[28] R. Ramakrishnan and J. D. Ullman. A survey of deductive database
systems. Journal of Logic Programming, 23(2):125–149, 1995.
[29] T. W. Reps. Solving demand versions of interprocedural analysis
problems. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Compiler Construction, pages 389–403, 1994.
[30] F. Sáenz-Pérez. Outer joins in a deductive database system. Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 282:73–88, 2012.
[31] B. Scholz, K. Vorobyov, P. Krishnan, and T. Westmann. A datalog
source-to-source translator for static program analysis: An experience
report. In 24th Australasian Software Engineering Conference, ASWEC
2015, Adelaide, SA, Australia, September 28 - October 1, 2015, pages
28–37. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
[32] J. Seo, J. Park, J. Shin, and M. S. Lam. Distributed Socialite: A Datalog-
based language for large-scale graph analysis. In VLDB Endowment,
volume 6, pages 1906–1917, 2013.
[33] D. Sereni, P. Avgustinov, and O. de Moor.
Adding magic to an
optimising datalog compiler. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD ’08, pages
553–566, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[34] Y. Smaragdakis, G. Kastrinis, and G. Balatsouras.
Introspective
analysis: Context-sensitivity, across the board. In PLDI, pages 485–495,
New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM.
[35] J. D. Ullman. Bottom-up beats top-down for datalog. In Proceedings of
the Eighth ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Symposium on Principles
of Database Systems, PODS ’89, pages 140–149, New York, NY, USA,
1989. ACM.
[36] J. Whaley and M. S. Lam. Cloning-based context-sensitive pointer
alias analysis using binary decision diagrams. In PLDI, pages 131–144.
ACM, 2004.
[37] J. Whaley, D. Avots, M. Carbin, and M. S. Lam. Using Datalog with
binary decision diagrams for program analysis. In APLAS, pages 97–
118, 2005.
